BOOK XI

  In the forenoon the fight is equal, but Agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the Achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--Hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by Diomed--Paris wounds
  Diomed--Ulysses, Nestor, and Idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--Machaon is wounded--Nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--Achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends Patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--This
  is the beginning of evil for Patroclus--Nestor makes a long
  speech.

AND now as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, Jove sent fierce Discord with the
ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the Achaeans. She took her
stand by the huge black hull of Ulysses' ship which was middlemost of
all, so that her voice might carry farthest on either side, on the one
hand towards the tents of Ajax son of Telamon, and on the other towards
those of Achilles--for these two heroes, well-assured of their own
strength, had valorously drawn up their ships at the two ends of the
line. There she took her stand, and raised a cry both loud and shrill
that filled the Achaeans with courage, giving them heart to fight
resolutely and with all their might, so that they had rather stay there
and do battle than go home in their ships.

The son of Atreus shouted aloud and bade the Argives gird themselves
for battle while he put on his armour. First he girded his goodly
greaves about his legs, making them fast with ankle-clasps of silver;
and about his chest he set the breastplate which Cinyras had once given
him as a guest-gift. It had been noised abroad as far as Cyprus that
the Achaeans were about to sail for Troy, and therefore he gave it to
the king. It had ten courses of dark cyanus, twelve of gold, and ten of
tin. There were serpents of cyanus that reared themselves up towards
the neck, three upon either side, like the rainbows which the son of
Saturn has set in heaven as a sign to mortal men. About his shoulders
he threw his sword, studded with bosses of gold; and the scabbard was
of silver with a chain of gold wherewith to hang it. He took moreover
the richly-dight shield that covered his body when he was in
battle--fair to see, with ten circles of bronze running all round it.
On the body of the shield there were twenty bosses of white tin, with
another of dark cyanus in the middle: this last was made to show a
Gorgon's head, fierce and grim, with Rout and Panic on either side. The
band for the arm to go through was of silver, on which there was a
writhing snake of cyanus with three heads that sprang from a single
neck, and went in and out among one another. On his head Agamemnon set
a helmet, with a peak before and behind, and four plumes of horse-hair
that nodded menacingly above it; then he grasped two redoubtable
bronze-shod spears, and the gleam of his armour shot from him as a
flame into the firmament, while Juno and Minerva thundered in honour of
the king of rich Mycene.

Every man now left his horses in charge of his charioteer to hold them
in readiness by the trench, while he went into battle on foot clad in
full armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into the dawning. The
chiefs were armed and at the trench before the horses got there, but
these came up presently. The son of Saturn sent a portent of evil sound
about their host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was about to
send many a brave man hurrying down to Hades.

The Trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain, were
gathered round great Hector, noble Polydamas, Aeneas who was honoured
by the Trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of Antenor,
Polybus, Agenor, and young Acamas beauteous as a god. Hector's round
shield showed in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines
for a moment through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath
them; even so was Hector now seen in the front ranks and now again in
the hindermost, and his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of
aegis-bearing Jove.

And now as a band of reapers mow swathes of wheat or barley upon a rich
man's land, and the sheaves fall thick before them, even so did the
Trojans and Achaeans fall upon one another; they were in no mood for
yielding but fought like wolves, and neither side got the better of the
other. Discord was glad as she beheld them, for she was the only god
that went among them; the others were not there, but stayed quietly
each in his own home among the dells and valleys of Olympus. All of
them blamed the son of Saturn for wanting to give victory to the
Trojans, but father Jove heeded them not: he held aloof from all, and
sat apart in his all-glorious majesty, looking down upon the city of
the Trojans, the ships of the Achaeans, the gleam of bronze, and alike
upon the slayers and on the slain.

Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning, their darts
rained thick on one another and the people perished, but as the hour
drew nigh when a woodman working in some mountain forest will get his
midday meal--for he has felled till his hands are weary; he is tired
out, and must now have food--then the Danaans with a cry that rang
through all their ranks, broke the battalions of the enemy. Agamemnon
led them on, and slew first Bienor, a leader of his people, and
afterwards his comrade and charioteer Oileus, who sprang from his
chariot and was coming full towards him; but Agamemnon struck him on
the forehead with his spear; his bronze visor was of no avail against
the weapon, which pierced both bronze and bone, so that his brains were
battered in and he was killed in full fight.

Agamemnon stripped their shirts from off them and left them with their
breasts all bare to lie where they had fallen. He then went on to kill
Isus and Antiphus two sons of Priam, the one a bastard, the other born
in wedlock; they were in the same chariot--the bastard driving, while
noble Antiphus fought beside him. Achilles had once taken both of them
prisoners in the glades of Ida, and had bound them with fresh withes as
they were shepherding, but he had taken a ransom for them; now,
however, Agamemnon son of Atreus smote Isus in the chest above the
nipple with his spear, while he struck Antiphus hard by the ear and
threw him from his chariot. Forthwith he stripped their goodly armour
from off them and recognized them, for he had already seen them at
ships when Achilles brought them in from Ida. As a lion fastens on the
fawns of a hind and crushes them in his great jaws, robbing them of
their tender life while he on his way back to his lair--the hind can do
nothing for them even though she be close by, for she is in an agony of
fear, and flies through the thick forest, sweating, and at her utmost
speed before the mighty monster--so, no man of the Trojans could help
Isus and Antiphus, for they were themselves flying in panic before the
Argives.

Then King Agamemnon took the two sons of Antimachus, Pisander and brave
Hippolochus. It was Antimachus who had been foremost in preventing
Helen's being restored to Menelaus, for he was largely bribed by
Alexandrus; and now Agamemnon took his two sons, both in the same
chariot, trying to bring their horses to a stand--for they had lost
hold of the reins and the horses were mad with fear. The son of Atreus
sprang upon them like a lion, and the pair besought him from their
chariot. "Take us alive," they cried, "son of Atreus, and you shall
receive a great ransom for us. Our father Antimachus has great store of
gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from this he will satisfy you with
a very large ransom should he hear of our being alive at the ships of
the Achaeans."

With such piteous words and tears did they beseech the king, but they
heard no pitiful answer in return. "If," said Agamemnon, "you are sons
of Antimachus, who once at a council of Trojans proposed that Menelaus
and Ulysses, who had come to you as envoys, should be killed and not
suffered to return, you shall now pay for the foul iniquity of your
father."

As he spoke he felled Pisander from his chariot to the earth, smiting
him on the chest with his spear, so that he lay face uppermost upon the
ground. Hippolochus fled, but him too did Agamemnon smite; he cut off
his hands and his head--which he sent rolling in among the crowd as
though it were a ball. There he let them both lie, and wherever the
ranks were thickest thither he flew, while the other Achaeans followed.
Foot soldiers drove the foot soldiers of the foe in rout before them,
and slew them; horsemen did the like by horsemen, and the thundering
tramp of the horses raised a cloud of dust from off the plain. King
Agamemnon followed after, ever slaying them and cheering on the
Achaeans. As when some mighty forest is all ablaze--the eddying gusts
whirl fire in all directions till the thickets shrivel and are consumed
before the blast of the flame--even so fell the heads of the flying
Trojans before Agamemnon son of Atreus, and many a noble pair of steeds
drew an empty chariot along the highways of war, for lack of drivers
who were lying on the plain, more useful now to vultures than to their
wives.

Jove drew Hector away from the darts and dust, with the carnage and din
of battle; but the son of Atreus sped onwards, calling out lustily to
the Danaans. They flew on by the tomb of old Ilus, son of Dardanus, in
the middle of the plain, and past the place of the wild fig-tree making
always for the city--the son of Atreus still shouting, and with hands
all bedrabbled in gore; but when they had reached the Scaean gates and
the oak tree, there they halted and waited for the others to come up.
Meanwhile the Trojans kept on flying over the middle of the plain like
a herd of cows maddened with fright when a lion has attacked them in
the dead of night--he springs on one of them, seizes her neck in the
grip of his strong teeth and then laps up her blood and gorges himself
upon her entrails--even so did King Agamemnon son of Atreus pursue the
foe, ever slaughtering the hindmost as they fled pell-mell before him.
Many a man was flung headlong from his chariot by the hand of the son
of Atreus, for he wielded his spear with fury.

But when he was just about to reach the high wall and the city, the
father of gods and men came down from heaven and took his seat,
thunderbolt in hand, upon the crest of many-fountained Ida. He then
told Iris of the golden wings to carry a message for him. "Go," said
he, "fleet Iris, and speak thus to Hector--say that so long as he sees
Agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks, he is
to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when
Agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his
chariot, then will I vouchsafe him strength to slay till he reach the
ships and night falls at the going down of the sun."

Iris hearkened and obeyed. Down she went to strong Ilius from the
crests of Ida, and found Hector son of Priam standing by his chariot
and horses. Then she said, "Hector son of Priam, peer of gods in
counsel, father Jove has sent me to bear you this message--so long as
you see Agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks,
you are to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle,
but when Agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to
his chariot, then will Jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till you
reach the ships, and till night falls at the going down of the sun."

When she had thus spoken Iris left him, and Hector sprang full armed
from his chariot to the ground, brandishing his spear as he went about
everywhere among the host, cheering his men on to fight, and stirring
the dread strife of battle. The Trojans then wheeled round, and again
met the Achaeans, while the Argives on their part strengthened their
battalions. The battle was now in array and they stood face to face
with one another, Agamemnon ever pressing forward in his eagerness to
be ahead of all others.

Tell me now ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus, who,
whether of the Trojans or of their allies, was first to face Agamemnon?
It was Iphidamas son of Antenor, a man both brave and of great stature,
who was brought up in fertile Thrace, the mother of sheep. Cisses, his
mother's father, brought him up in his own house when he was a
child--Cisses, father to fair Theano. When he reached manhood, Cisses
would have kept him there, and was for giving him his daughter in
marriage, but as soon as he had married he set out to fight the
Achaeans with twelve ships that followed him: these he had left at
Percote and had come on by land to Ilius. He it was that now met
Agamemnon son of Atreus. When they were close up with one another, the
son of Atreus missed his aim, and Iphidamas hit him on the girdle below
the cuirass and then flung himself upon him, trusting to his strength
of arm; the girdle, however, was not pierced, nor nearly so, for the
point of the spear struck against the silver and was turned aside as
though it had been lead: King Agamemnon caught it from his hand, and
drew it towards him with the fury of a lion; he then drew his sword,
and killed Iphidamas by striking him on the neck. So there the poor
fellow lay, sleeping a sleep as it were of bronze, killed in the
defence of his fellow-citizens, far from his wedded wife, of whom he
had had no joy though he had given much for her: he had given a
hundred-head of cattle down, and had promised later on to give a
thousand sheep and goats mixed, from the countless flocks of which he
was possessed. Agamemnon son of Atreus then despoiled him, and carried
off his armour into the host of the Achaeans.

When noble Coon, Antenor's eldest son, saw this, sore indeed were his
eyes at the sight of his fallen brother. Unseen by Agamemnon he got
beside him, spear in hand, and wounded him in the middle of his arm
below the elbow, the point of the spear going right through the arm.
Agamemnon was convulsed with pain, but still not even for this did he
leave off struggling and fighting, but grasped his spear that flew as
fleet as the wind, and sprang upon Coon who was trying to drag off the
body of his brother--his father's son--by the foot, and was crying for
help to all the bravest of his comrades; but Agamemnon struck him with
a bronze-shod spear and killed him as he was dragging the dead body
through the press of men under cover of his shield: he then cut off his
head, standing over the body of Iphidamas. Thus did the sons of Antenor
meet their fate at the hands of the son of Atreus, and go down into the
house of Hades.

As long as the blood still welled warm from his wound Agamemnon went
about attacking the ranks of the enemy with spear and sword and with
great handfuls of stone, but when the blood had ceased to flow and the
wound grew dry, the pain became great. As the sharp pangs which the
Eilithuiae, goddesses of childbirth, daughters of Juno and dispensers
of cruel pain, send upon a woman when she is in labour--even so sharp
were the pangs of the son of Atreus. He sprang on to his chariot, and
bade his charioteer drive to the ships, for he was in great agony. With
a loud clear voice he shouted to the Danaans, "My friends, princes and
counsellors of the Argives, defend the ships yourselves, for Jove has
not suffered me to fight the whole day through against the Trojans."

With this the charioteer turned his horses towards the ships, and they
flew forward nothing loth. Their chests were white with foam and their
bellies with dust, as they drew the wounded king out of the battle.

When Hector saw Agamemnon quit the field, he shouted to the Trojans and
Lycians saying, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanian warriors, be men, my
friends, and acquit yourselves in battle bravely; their best man has
left them, and Jove has vouchsafed me a great triumph; charge the foe
with your chariots that you may win still greater glory."

With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and as a huntsman
hounds his dogs on against a lion or wild boar, even so did Hector,
peer of Mars, hound the proud Trojans on against the Achaeans. Full of
hope he plunged in among the foremost, and fell on the fight like some
fierce tempest that swoops down upon the sea, and lashes its deep blue
waters into fury.

What, then is the full tale of those whom Hector son of Priam killed in
the hour of triumph which Jove then vouchsafed him? First Asaeus,
Autonous, and Opites; Dolops son of Clytius, Opheltius and Agelaus;
Aesymnus, Orus and Hipponous steadfast in battle; these chieftains of
the Achaeans did Hector slay, and then he fell upon the rank and file.
As when the west wind hustles the clouds of the white south and beats
them down with the fierceness of its fury--the waves of the sea roll
high, and the spray is flung aloft in the rage of the wandering
wind--even so thick were the heads of them that fell by the hand of
Hector.

All had then been lost and no help for it, and the Achaeans would have
fled pell-mell to their ships, had not Ulysses cried out to Diomed,
"Son of Tydeus, what has happened to us that we thus forget our
prowess? Come, my good fellow, stand by my side and help me, we shall
be shamed for ever if Hector takes the ships."

And Diomed answered, "Come what may, I will stand firm; but we shall
have scant joy of it, for Jove is minded to give victory to the Trojans
rather than to us."

With these words he struck Thymbraeus from his chariot to the ground,
smiting him in the left breast with his spear, while Ulysses killed
Molion who was his squire. These they let lie, now that they had
stopped their fighting; the two heroes then went on playing havoc with
the foe, like two wild boars that turn in fury and rend the hounds that
hunt them. Thus did they turn upon the Trojans and slay them, and the
Achaeans were thankful to have breathing time in their flight from
Hector.

They then took two princes with their chariot, the two sons of Merops
of Percote, who excelled all others in the arts of divination. He had
forbidden his sons to go to the war, but they would not obey him, for
fate lured them to their fall. Diomed son of Tydeus slew them both and
stripped them of their armour, while Ulysses killed Hippodamus and
Hypeirochus.

And now the son of Saturn as he looked down from Ida ordained that
neither side should have the advantage, and they kept on killing one
another. The son of Tydeus speared Agastrophus son of Paeon in the
hip-joint with his spear. His chariot was not at hand for him to fly
with, so blindly confident had he been. His squire was in charge of it
at some distance and he was fighting on foot among the foremost until
he lost his life. Hector soon marked the havoc Diomed and Ulysses were
making, and bore down upon them with a loud cry, followed by the Trojan
ranks; brave Diomed was dismayed when he saw them, and said to Ulysses
who was beside him, "Great Hector is bearing down upon us and we shall
be undone; let us stand firm and wait his onset."

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it, nor did he miss his
mark. He had aimed at Hector's head near the top of his helmet, but
bronze was turned by bronze, and Hector was untouched, for the spear
was stayed by the visored helm made with three plates of metal, which
Phoebus Apollo had given him. Hector sprang back with a great bound
under cover of the ranks; he fell on his knees and propped himself with
his brawny hand leaning on the ground, for darkness had fallen on his
eyes. The son of Tydeus having thrown his spear dashed in among the
foremost fighters, to the place where he had seen it strike the ground;
meanwhile Hector recovered himself and springing back into his chariot
mingled with the crowd, by which means he saved his life. But Diomed
made at him with his spear and said, "Dog, you have again got away
though death was close on your heels. Phoebus Apollo, to whom I ween
you pray ere you go into battle, has again saved you, nevertheless I
will meet you and make an end of you hereafter, if there is any god who
will stand by me too and be my helper. For the present I must pursue
those I can lay hands on."

As he spoke he began stripping the spoils from the son of Paeon, but
Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen aimed an arrow at him, leaning
against a pillar of the monument which men had raised to Ilus son of
Dardanus, a ruler in days of old. Diomed had taken the cuirass from off
the breast of Agastrophus, his heavy helmet also, and the shield from
off his shoulders, when Paris drew his bow and let fly an arrow that
sped not from his hand in vain, but pierced the flat of Diomed's right
foot, going right through it and fixing itself in the ground. Thereon
Paris with a hearty laugh sprang forward from his hiding-place, and
taunted him saying, "You are wounded--my arrow has not been shot in
vain; would that it had hit you in the belly and killed you, for thus
the Trojans, who fear you as goats fear a lion, would have had a truce
from evil."

Diomed all undaunted answered, "Archer, you who without your bow are
nothing, slanderer and seducer, if you were to be tried in single
combat fighting in full armour, your bow and your arrows would serve
you in little stead. Vain is your boast in that you have scratched the
sole of my foot. I care no more than if a girl or some silly boy had
hit me. A worthless coward can inflict but a light wound; when I wound
a man though I but graze his skin it is another matter, for my weapon
will lay him low. His wife will tear her cheeks for grief and his
children will be fatherless: there will he rot, reddening the earth
with his blood, and vultures, not women, will gather round him."

Thus he spoke, but Ulysses came up and stood over him. Under this cover
he sat down to draw the arrow from his foot, and sharp was the pain he
suffered as he did so. Then he sprang on to his chariot and bade the
charioteer drive him to the ships, for he was sick at heart.

Ulysses was now alone; not one of the Argives stood by him, for they
were all panic-stricken. "Alas," said he to himself in his dismay,
"what will become of me? It is ill if I turn and fly before these odds,
but it will be worse if I am left alone and taken prisoner, for the son
of Saturn has struck the rest of the Danaans with panic. But why talk
to myself in this way? Well do I know that though cowards quit the
field, a hero, whether he wound or be wounded, must stand firm and hold
his own."

While he was thus in two minds, the ranks of the Trojans advanced and
hemmed him in, and bitterly did they come to rue it. As hounds and
lusty youths set upon a wild boar that sallies from his lair whetting
his white tusks--they attack him from every side and can hear the
gnashing of his jaws, but for all his fierceness they still hold their
ground--even so furiously did the Trojans attack Ulysses. First he
sprang spear in hand upon Deiopites and wounded him on the shoulder
with a downward blow; then he killed Thoon and Ennomus. After these he
struck Chersidamas in the loins under his shield as he had just sprung
down from his chariot; so he fell in the dust and clutched the earth in
the hollow of his hand. These he let lie, and went on to wound Charops
son of Hippasus own brother to noble Socus. Socus, hero that he was,
made all speed to help him, and when he was close to Ulysses he said,
"Far-famed Ulysses, insatiable of craft and toil, this day you shall
either boast of having killed both the sons of Hippasus and stripped
them of their armour, or you shall fall before my spear."

With these words he struck the shield of Ulysses. The spear went
through the shield and passed on through his richly wrought cuirass,
tearing the flesh from his side, but Pallas Minerva did not suffer it
to pierce the entrails of the hero. Ulysses knew that his hour was not
yet come, but he gave ground and said to Socus, "Wretch, you shall now
surely die. You have stayed me from fighting further with the Trojans,
but you shall now fall by my spear, yielding glory to myself, and your
soul to Hades of the noble steeds."

Socus had turned in flight, but as he did so, the spear struck him in
the back midway between the shoulders, and went right through his
chest. He fell heavily to the ground and Ulysses vaunted over him
saying, "O Socus, son of Hippasus tamer of horses, death has been too
quick for you and you have not escaped him: poor wretch, not even in
death shall your father and mother close your eyes, but the ravening
vultures shall enshroud you with the flapping of their dark wings and
devour you. Whereas even though I fall the Achaeans will give me my due
rites of burial."

So saying he drew Socus's heavy spear out of his flesh and from his
shield, and the blood welled forth when the spear was withdrawn so that
he was much dismayed. When the Trojans saw that Ulysses was bleeding
they raised a great shout and came on in a body towards him; he
therefore gave ground, and called his comrades to come and help him.
Thrice did he cry as loudly as man can cry, and thrice did brave
Menelaus hear him; he turned, therefore, to Ajax who was close beside
him and said, "Ajax, noble son of Telamon, captain of your people, the
cry of Ulysses rings in my ears, as though the Trojans had cut him off
and were worsting him while he is single-handed. Let us make our way
through the throng; it will be well that we defend him; I fear he may
come to harm for all his valour if he be left without support, and the
Danaans would miss him sorely."

He led the way and mighty Ajax went with him. The Trojans had gathered
round Ulysses like ravenous mountain jackals round the carcase of some
horned stag that has been hit with an arrow--the stag has fled at full
speed so long as his blood was warm and his strength has lasted, but
when the arrow has overcome him, the savage jackals devour him in the
shady glades of the forest. Then heaven sends a fierce lion thither,
whereon the jackals fly in terror and the lion robs them of their
prey--even so did Trojans many and brave gather round crafty Ulysses,
but the hero stood at bay and kept them off with his spear. Ajax then
came up with his shield before him like a wall, and stood hard by,
whereon the Trojans fled in all directions. Menelaus took Ulysses by
the hand, and led him out of the press while his squire brought up his
chariot, but Ajax rushed furiously on the Trojans and killed Doryclus,
a bastard son of Priam; then he wounded Pandocus, Lysandrus, Pyrasus,
and Pylartes; as some swollen torrent comes rushing in full flood from
the mountains on to the plain, big with the rain of heaven--many a dry
oak and many a pine does it engulf, and much mud does it bring down and
cast into the sea--even so did brave Ajax chase the foe furiously over
the plain, slaying both men and horses.

Hector did not yet know what Ajax was doing, for he was fighting on the
extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river Scamander, where
the carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest round Nestor and brave
Idomeneus. Among these Hector was making great slaughter with his spear
and furious driving, and was destroying the ranks that were opposed to
him; still the Achaeans would have given no ground, had not Alexandrus
husband of lovely Helen stayed the prowess of Machaon, shepherd of his
people, by wounding him in the right shoulder with a triple-barbed
arrow. The Achaeans were in great fear that as the fight had turned
against them the Trojans might take him prisoner, and Idomeneus said to
Nestor, "Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, mount your
chariot at once; take Machaon with you and drive your horses to the
ships as fast as you can. A physician is worth more than several other
men put together, for he can cut out arrows and spread healing herbs."

Nestor knight of Gerene did as Idomeneus had counselled; he at once
mounted his chariot, and Machaon son of the famed physician
Aesculapius, went with him. He lashed his horses and they flew onward
nothing loth towards the ships, as though of their own free will.

Then Cebriones seeing the Trojans in confusion said to Hector from his
place beside him, "Hector, here are we two fighting on the extreme wing
of the battle, while the other Trojans are in pell-mell rout, they and
their horses. Ajax son of Telamon is driving them before him; I know
him by the breadth of his shield: let us turn our chariot and horses
thither, where horse and foot are fighting most desperately, and where
the cry of battle is loudest."

With this he lashed his goodly steeds, and when they felt the whip they
drew the chariot full speed among the Achaeans and Trojans, over the
bodies and shields of those that had fallen: the axle was bespattered
with blood, and the rail round the car was covered with splashes both
from the horses' hoofs and from the tyres of the wheels. Hector tore
his way through and flung himself into the thick of the fight, and his
presence threw the Danaans into confusion, for his spear was not long
idle; nevertheless though he went among the ranks with sword and spear,
and throwing great stones, he avoided Ajax son of Telamon, for Jove
would have been angry with him if he had fought a better man than
himself.

Then father Jove from his high throne struck fear into the heart of
Ajax, so that he stood there dazed and threw his shield behind
him--looking fearfully at the throng of his foes as though he were some
wild beast, and turning hither and thither but crouching slowly
backwards. As peasants with their hounds chase a lion from their
stockyard, and watch by night to prevent his carrying off the pick of
their herd--he makes his greedy spring, but in vain, for the darts from
many a strong hand fall thick around him, with burning brands that
scare him for all his fury, and when morning comes he slinks foiled and
angry away--even so did Ajax, sorely against his will, retreat angrily
before the Trojans, fearing for the ships of the Achaeans. Or as some
lazy ass that has had many a cudgel broken about his back, when he into
a field begins eating the corn--boys beat him but he is too many for
them, and though they lay about with their sticks they cannot hurt him;
still when he has had his fill they at last drive him from the
field--even so did the Trojans and their allies pursue great Ajax, ever
smiting the middle of his shield with their darts. Now and again he
would turn and show fight, keeping back the battalions of the Trojans,
and then he would again retreat; but he prevented any of them from
making his way to the ships. Single-handed he stood midway between the
Trojans and Achaeans: the spears that sped from their hands stuck some
of them in his mighty shield, while many, though thirsting for his
blood, fell to the ground ere they could reach him to the wounding of
his fair flesh.

Now when Eurypylus the brave son of Euaemon saw that Ajax was being
overpowered by the rain of arrows, he went up to him and hurled his
spear. He struck Apisaon son of Phausius in the liver below the
midriff, and laid him low. Eurypylus sprang upon him, and stripped the
armour from his shoulders; but when Alexandrus saw him, he aimed an
arrow at him which struck him in the right thigh; the arrow broke, but
the point that was left in the wound dragged on the thigh; he drew
back, therefore, under cover of his comrades to save his life, shouting
as he did so to the Danaans, "My friends, princes and counsellors of
the Argives, rally to the defence of Ajax who is being overpowered, and
I doubt whether he will come out of the fight alive. Hither, then, to
the rescue of great Ajax son of Telamon."

Even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came near,
and gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from their
shoulders so as to give him cover. Ajax then made towards them, and
turned round to stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men.

Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. Meanwhile the mares
of Neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing Nestor out of the
fight, and with him Machaon shepherd of his people. Achilles saw and
took note, for he was standing on the stern of his ship watching the
hard stress and struggle of the fight. He called from the ship to his
comrade Patroclus, who heard him in the tent and came out looking like
Mars himself--here indeed was the beginning of the ill that presently
befell him. "Why," said he, "Achilles, do you call me? What do you want
with me?" And Achilles answered, "Noble son of Menoetius, man after my
own heart, I take it that I shall now have the Achaeans praying at my
knees, for they are in great straits; go, Patroclus, and ask Nestor who
it is that he is bearing away wounded from the field; from his back I
should say it was Machaon son of Aesculapius, but I could not see his
face for the horses went by me at full speed."

Patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him, and set off running
by the ships and tents of the Achaeans.

When Nestor and Machaon had reached the tents of the son of Neleus,
they dismounted, and an esquire, Eurymedon, took the horses from the
chariot. The pair then stood in the breeze by the seaside to dry the
sweat from their shirts, and when they had so done they came inside and
took their seats. Fair Hecamede, whom Nestor had had awarded to him
from Tenedos when Achilles took it, mixed them a mess; she was daughter
of wise Arsinous, and the Achaeans had given her to Nestor because he
excelled all of them in counsel. First she set for them a fair and
well-made table that had feet of cyanus; on it there was a vessel of
bronze and an onion to give relish to the drink, with honey and cakes
of barley-meal. There was also a cup of rare workmanship which the old
man had brought with him from home, studded with bosses of gold; it had
four handles, on each of which there were two golden doves feeding, and
it had two feet to stand on. Any one else would hardly have been able
to lift it from the table when it was full, but Nestor could do so
quite easily. In this the woman, as fair as a goddess, mixed them a
mess with Pramnian wine; she grated goat's milk cheese into it with a
bronze grater, threw in a handful of white barley-meal, and having thus
prepared the mess she bade them drink it. When they had done so and had
thus quenched their thirst, they fell talking with one another, and at
this moment Patroclus appeared at the door.

When the old man saw him he sprang from his seat, seized his hand, led
him into the tent, and bade him take his place among them; but
Patroclus stood where he was and said, "Noble sir, I may not stay, you
cannot persuade me to come in; he that sent me is not one to be trifled
with, and he bade me ask who the wounded man was whom you were bearing
away from the field. I can now see for myself that he is Machaon,
shepherd of his people. I must go back and tell Achilles. You, sir,
know what a terrible man he is, and how ready to blame even where no
blame should lie."

And Nestor answered, "Why should Achilles care to know how many of the
Achaeans may be wounded? He recks not of the dismay that reigns in our
host; our most valiant chieftains lie disabled, brave Diomed, son of
Tydeus, is wounded; so are Ulysses and Agamemnon; Eurypylus has been
hit with an arrow in the thigh, and I have just been bringing this man
from the field--he too wounded with an arrow. Nevertheless, Achilles,
so valiant though he be, cares not and knows no ruth. Will he wait till
the ships, do what we may, are in a blaze, and we perish one upon the
other? As for me, I have no strength nor stay in me any longer; would
that I were still young and strong as in the days when there was a
fight between us and the men of Elis about some cattle-raiding. I then
killed Itymoneus, the valiant son of Hypeirochus, a dweller in Elis, as
I was driving in the spoil; he was hit by a dart thrown by my hand
while fighting in the front rank in defence of his cows, so he fell and
the country people around him were in great fear. We drove off a vast
quantity of booty from the plain, fifty herds of cattle and as many
flocks of sheep; fifty droves also of pigs, and as many wide-spreading
flocks of goats. Of horses, moreover, we seized a hundred and fifty,
all of them mares, and many had foals running with them. All these did
we drive by night to Pylus, the city of Neleus, taking them within the
city; and the heart of Neleus was glad in that I had taken so much,
though it was the first time I had ever been in the field. At daybreak
the heralds went round crying that all in Elis to whom there was a debt
owing should come; and the leading Pylians assembled to divide the
spoils. There were many to whom the Epeans owed chattels, for we men of
Pylus were few and had been oppressed with wrong; in former years
Hercules had come, and had laid his hand heavy upon us, so that all our
best men had perished. Neleus had had twelve sons, but I alone was
left; the others had all been killed. The Epeans presuming upon all
this had looked down upon us and had done us much evil. My father chose
a herd of cattle and a great flock of sheep--three hundred in all--and
he took their shepherds with him, for there was a great debt due to him
in Elis, to wit four horses, winners of prizes. They and their chariots
with them had gone to the games and were to run for a tripod, but King
Augeas took them, and sent back their driver grieving for the loss of
his horses. Neleus was angered by what he had both said and done, and
took great value in return, but he divided the rest, that no man might
have less than his full share.

"Thus did we order all things, and offer sacrifices to the gods
throughout the city; but three days afterwards the Epeans came in a
body, many in number, they and their chariots, in full array, and with
them the two Moliones in their armour, though they were still lads and
unused to fighting. Now there is a certain town, Thryoessa, perched
upon a rock on the river Alpheus, the border city of Pylus. This they
would destroy, and pitched their camp about it, but when they had
crossed their whole plain, Minerva darted down by night from Olympus
and bade us set ourselves in array; and she found willing soldiers in
Pylos, for the men meant fighting. Neleus would not let me arm, and hid
my horses, for he said that as yet I could know nothing about war;
nevertheless Minerva so ordered the fight that, all on foot as I was, I
fought among our mounted forces and vied with the foremost of them.
There is a river Minyeius that falls into the sea near Arene, and there
they that were mounted (and I with them) waited till morning, when the
companies of foot soldiers came up with us in force. Thence in full
panoply and equipment we came towards noon to the sacred waters of the
Alpheus, and there we offered victims to almighty Jove, with a bull to
Alpheus, another to Neptune, and a herd-heifer to Minerva. After this
we took supper in our companies, and laid us down to rest each in his
armour by the river.

"The Epeans were beleaguering the city and were determined to take it,
but ere this might be there was a desperate fight in store for them.
When the sun's rays began to fall upon the earth we joined battle,
praying to Jove and to Minerva, and when the fight had begun, I was the
first to kill my man and take his horses--to wit the warrior Mulius. He
was son-in-law to Augeas, having married his eldest daughter,
golden-haired Agamede, who knew the virtues of every herb which grows
upon the face of the earth. I speared him as he was coming towards me,
and when he fell headlong in the dust, I sprang upon his chariot and
took my place in the front ranks. The Epeans fled in all directions
when they saw the captain of their horsemen (the best man they had)
laid low, and I swept down on them like a whirlwind, taking fifty
chariots--and in each of them two men bit the dust, slain by my spear.
I should have even killed the two Moliones, sons of Actor, unless their
real father, Neptune lord of the earthquake, had hidden them in a thick
mist and borne them out of the fight. Thereon Jove vouchsafed the
Pylians a great victory, for we chased them far over the plain, killing
the men and bringing in their armour, till we had brought our horses to
Buprasium, rich in wheat, and to the Olenian rock, with the hill that
is called Alision, at which point Minerva turned the people back. There
I slew the last man and left him; then the Achaeans drove their horses
back from Buprasium to Pylos and gave thanks to Jove among the gods,
and among mortal men to Nestor.

"Such was I among my peers, as surely as ever was, but Achilles is for
keeping all his valour for himself; bitterly will he rue it hereafter
when the host is being cut to pieces. My good friend, did not Menoetius
charge you thus, on the day when he sent you from Phthia to Agamemnon?
Ulysses and I were in the house, inside, and heard all that he said to
you; for we came to the fair house of Peleus while beating up recruits
throughout all Achaea, and when we got there we found Menoetius and
yourself, and Achilles with you. The old knight Peleus was in the outer
court, roasting the fat thigh-bones of a heifer to Jove the lord of
thunder; and he held a gold chalice in his hand from which he poured
drink-offerings of wine over the burning sacrifice. You two were busy
cutting up the heifer, and at that moment we stood at the gates,
whereon Achilles sprang to his feet, led us by the hand into the house,
placed us at table, and set before us such hospitable entertainment as
guests expect. When we had satisfied ourselves with meat and drink, I
said my say and urged both of you to join us. You were ready enough to
do so, and the two old men charged you much and straitly. Old Peleus
bade his son Achilles fight ever among the foremost and outvie his
peers, while Menoetius the son of Actor spoke thus to you: 'My son,'
said he, 'Achilles is of nobler birth than you are, but you are older
than he, though he is far the better man of the two. Counsel him
wisely, guide him in the right way, and he will follow you to his own
profit.' Thus did your father charge you, but you have forgotten;
nevertheless, even now, say all this to Achilles if he will listen to
you. Who knows but with heaven's help you may talk him over, for it is
good to take a friend's advice. If, however, he is fearful about some
oracle, or if his mother has told him something from Jove, then let him
send you, and let the rest of the Myrmidons follow with you, if
perchance you may bring light and saving to the Danaans. And let him
send you into battle clad in his own armour, that the Trojans may
mistake you for him and leave off fighting; the sons of the Achaeans
may thus have time to get their breath, for they are hard pressed and
there is little breathing time in battle. You, who are fresh, might
easily drive a tired enemy back to his walls and away from the tents
and ships."

With these words he moved the heart of Patroclus, who set off running
by the line of the ships to Achilles, descendant of Aeacus. When he had
got as far as the ships of Ulysses, where was their place of assembly
and court of justice, with their altars dedicated to the gods,
Eurypylus son of Euaemon, met him, wounded in the thigh with an arrow,
and limping out of the fight. Sweat rained from his head and shoulders,
and black blood welled from his cruel wound, but his mind did not
wander. The son of Menoetius when he saw him had compassion upon him
and spoke piteously saying, "O unhappy princes and counsellors of the
Danaans, are you then doomed to feed the hounds of Troy with your fat,
far from your friends and your native land? Say, noble Eurypylus, will
the Achaeans be able to hold great Hector in check, or will they fall
now before his spear?"

Wounded Eurypylus made answer, "Noble Patroclus, there is no hope left
for the Achaeans but they will perish at their ships. All they that
were princes among us are lying struck down and wounded at the hands of
the Trojans, who are waxing stronger and stronger. But save me and take
me to your ship; cut out the arrow from my thigh; wash the black blood
from off it with warm water, and lay upon it those gracious herbs
which, so they say, have been shown you by Achilles, who was himself
shown them by Chiron, most righteous of all the centaurs. For of the
physicians Podalirius and Machaon, I hear that the one is lying wounded
in his tent and is himself in need of healing, while the other is
fighting the Trojans upon the plain."

"Hero Eurypylus," replied the brave son of Menoetius, "how may these
things be? What can I do? I am on my way to bear a message to noble
Achilles from Nestor of Gerene, bulwark of the Achaeans, but even so I
will not be unmindful of your distress."

With this he clasped him round the middle and led him into the tent,
and a servant, when he saw him, spread bullock-skins on the ground for
him to lie on. He laid him at full length and cut out the sharp arrow
from his thigh; he washed the black blood from the wound with warm
water; he then crushed a bitter herb, rubbing it between his hands, and
spread it upon the wound; this was a virtuous herb which killed all
pain; so the wound presently dried and the blood left off flowing.
