BOOK X

  Ulysses and Diomed go out as spies, and meet Dolon, who gives
  them information: they then kill him, and profiting by what
  he had told them, kill Rhesus king of the Thracians and take
  his horses.

NOW the other princes of the Achaeans slept soundly the whole night
through, but Agamemnon son of Atreus was troubled, so that he could get
no rest. As when fair Juno's lord flashes his lightning in token of
great rain or hail or snow when the snow-flakes whiten the ground, or
again as a sign that he will open the wide jaws of hungry war, even so
did Agamemnon heave many a heavy sigh, for his soul trembled within
him. When he looked upon the plain of Troy he marvelled at the many
watchfires burning in front of Ilius, and at the sound of pipes and
flutes and of the hum of men, but when presently he turned towards the
ships and hosts of the Achaeans, he tore his hair by handfuls before
Jove on high, and groaned aloud for the very disquietness of his soul.
In the end he deemed it best to go at once to Nestor son of Neleus, and
see if between them they could find any way of the Achaeans from
destruction. He therefore rose, put on his shirt, bound his sandals
about his comely feet, flung the skin of a huge tawny lion over his
shoulders--a skin that reached his feet--and took his spear in his hand.

Neither could Menelaus sleep, for he, too, boded ill for the Argives
who for his sake had sailed from far over the seas to fight the
Trojans. He covered his broad back with the skin of a spotted panther,
put a casque of bronze upon his head, and took his spear in his brawny
hand. Then he went to rouse his brother, who was by far the most
powerful of the Achaeans, and was honoured by the people as though he
were a god. He found him by the stern of his ship already putting his
goodly array about his shoulders, and right glad was he that his
brother had come.

Menelaus spoke first. "Why," said he, "my dear brother, are you thus
arming? Are you going to send any of our comrades to exploit the
Trojans? I greatly fear that no one will do you this service, and spy
upon the enemy alone in the dead of night. It will be a deed of great
daring."

And King Agamemnon answered, "Menelaus, we both of us need shrewd
counsel to save the Argives and our ships, for Jove has changed his
mind, and inclines towards Hector's sacrifices rather than ours. I
never saw nor heard tell of any man as having wrought such ruin in one
day as Hector has now wrought against the sons of the Achaeans--and
that too of his own unaided self, for he is son neither to god nor
goddess. The Argives will rue it long and deeply. Run, therefore, with
all speed by the line of the ships, and call Ajax and Idomeneus.
Meanwhile I will go to Nestor, and bid him rise and go about among the
companies of our sentinels to give them their instructions; they will
listen to him sooner than to any man, for his own son, and Meriones
brother in arms to Idomeneus, are captains over them. It was to them
more particularly that we gave this charge."

Menelaus replied, "How do I take your meaning? Am I to stay with them
and wait your coming, or shall I return here as soon as I have given
your orders?" "Wait," answered King Agamemnon, "for there are so many
paths about the camp that we might miss one another. Call every man on
your way, and bid him be stirring; name him by his lineage and by his
father's name, give each all titular observance, and stand not too much
upon your own dignity; we must take our full share of toil, for at our
birth Jove laid this heavy burden upon us."

With these instructions he sent his brother on his way, and went on to
Nestor shepherd of his people. He found him sleeping in his tent hard
by his own ship; his goodly armour lay beside him--his shield, his two
spears and his helmet; beside him also lay the gleaming girdle with
which the old man girded himself when he armed to lead his people into
battle--for his age stayed him not. He raised himself on his elbow and
looked up at Agamemnon. "Who is it," said he, "that goes thus about the
host and the ships alone and in the dead of night, when men are
sleeping? Are you looking for one of your mules or for some comrade? Do
not stand there and say nothing, but speak. What is your business?"

And Agamemnon answered, "Nestor, son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean
name, it is I, Agamemnon son of Atreus, on whom Jove has laid labour
and sorrow so long as there is breath in my body and my limbs carry me.
I am thus abroad because sleep sits not upon my eyelids, but my heart
is big with war and with the jeopardy of the Achaeans. I am in great
fear for the Danaans. I am at sea, and without sure counsel; my heart
beats as though it would leap out of my body, and my limbs fail me. If
then you can do anything--for you too cannot sleep--let us go the round
of the watch, and see whether they are drowsy with toil and sleeping to
the neglect of their duty. The enemy is encamped hard and we know not
but he may attack us by night."

Nestor replied, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, Jove
will not do all for Hector that Hector thinks he will; he will have
troubles yet in plenty if Achilles will lay aside his anger. I will go
with you, and we will rouse others, either the son of Tydeus, or
Ulysses, or fleet Ajax and the valiant son of Phyleus. Some one had
also better go and call Ajax and King Idomeneus, for their ships are
not near at hand but the farthest of all. I cannot however refrain from
blaming Menelaus, much as I love him and respect him--and I will say so
plainly, even at the risk of offending you--for sleeping and leaving
all this trouble to yourself. He ought to be going about imploring aid
from all the princes of the Achaeans, for we are in extreme danger."

And Agamemnon answered, "Sir, you may sometimes blame him justly, for
he is often remiss and unwilling to exert himself--not indeed from
sloth, nor yet heedlessness, but because he looks to me and expects me
to take the lead. On this occasion, however, he was awake before I was,
and came to me of his own accord. I have already sent him to call the
very men whom you have named. And now let us be going. We shall find
them with the watch outside the gates, for it was there I said that we
would meet them."

"In that case," answered Nestor, "the Argives will not blame him nor
disobey his orders when he urges them to fight or gives them
instructions."

With this he put on his shirt, and bound his sandals about his comely
feet. He buckled on his purple coat, of two thicknesses, large, and of
a rough shaggy texture, grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and
wended his way along the line of the Achaean ships. First he called
loudly to Ulysses peer of gods in counsel and woke him, for he was soon
roused by the sound of the battle-cry. He came outside his tent and
said, "Why do you go thus alone about the host, and along the line of
the ships in the stillness of the night? What is it that you find so
urgent?" And Nestor knight of Gerene answered, "Ulysses, noble son of
Laertes, take it not amiss, for the Achaeans are in great straits. Come
with me and let us wake some other, who may advise well with us whether
we shall fight or fly."

On this Ulysses went at once into his tent, put his shield about his
shoulders and came out with them. First they went to Diomed son of
Tydeus, and found him outside his tent clad in his armour with his
comrades sleeping round him and using their shields as pillows; as for
their spears, they stood upright on the spikes of their butts that were
driven into the ground, and the burnished bronze flashed afar like the
lightning of father Jove. The hero was sleeping upon the skin of an ox,
with a piece of fine carpet under his head; Nestor went up to him and
stirred him with his heel to rouse him, upbraiding him and urging him
to bestir himself. "Wake up," he exclaimed, "son of Tydeus. How can you
sleep on in this way? Can you not see that the Trojans are encamped on
the brow of the plain hard by our ships, with but a little space
between us and them?"

On these words Diomed leaped up instantly and said, "Old man, your
heart is of iron; you rest not one moment from your labours. Are there
no younger men among the Achaeans who could go about to rouse the
princes? There is no tiring you."

And Nestor knight of Gerene made answer, "My son, all that you have
said is true. I have good sons, and also much people who might call the
chieftains, but the Achaeans are in the gravest danger; life and death
are balanced as it were on the edge of a razor. Go then, for you are
younger than I, and of your courtesy rouse Ajax and the fleet son of
Phyleus."

Diomed threw the skin of a great tawny lion about his shoulders--a skin
that reached his feet--and grasped his spear. When he had roused the
heroes, he brought them back with him; they then went the round of
those who were on guard, and found the captains not sleeping at their
posts but wakeful and sitting with their arms about them. As sheep dogs
that watch their flocks when they are yarded, and hear a wild beast
coming through the mountain forest towards them--forthwith there is a
hue and cry of dogs and men, and slumber is broken--even so was sleep
chased from the eyes of the Achaeans as they kept the watches of the
wicked night, for they turned constantly towards the plain whenever
they heard any stir among the Trojans. The old man was glad and bade
them be of good cheer. "Watch on, my children," said he, "and let not
sleep get hold upon you, lest our enemies triumph over us."

With this he passed the trench, and with him the other chiefs of the
Achaeans who had been called to the council. Meriones and the brave son
of Nestor went also, for the princes bade them. When they were beyond
the trench that was dug round the wall they held their meeting on the
open ground where there was a space clear of corpses, for it was here
that when night fell Hector had turned back from his onslaught on the
Argives. They sat down, therefore, and held debate with one another.

Nestor spoke first. "My friends," said he, "is there any man bold
enough to venture among the Trojans, and cut off some straggler, or
bring us news of what the enemy mean to do whether they will stay here
by the ships away from the city, or whether, now that they have worsted
the Achaeans, they will retire within their walls. If he could learn
all this and come back safely here, his fame would be high as heaven in
the mouths of all men, and he would be rewarded richly; for the chiefs
from all our ships would each of them give him a black ewe with her
lamb--which is a present of surpassing value--and he would be asked as
a guest to all feasts and clan-gatherings."

They all held their peace, but Diomed of the loud war-cry spoke saying,
"Nestor, gladly will I visit the host of the Trojans over against us,
but if another will go with me I shall do so in greater confidence and
comfort. When two men are together, one of them may see some
opportunity which the other has not caught sight of; if a man is alone
he is less full of resource, and his wit is weaker."

On this several offered to go with Diomed. The two Ajaxes, servants of
Mars, Meriones, and the son of Nestor all wanted to go, so did Menelaus
son of Atreus; Ulysses also wished to go among the host of the Trojans,
for he was ever full of daring, and thereon Agamemnon king of men spoke
thus: "Diomed," said he, "son of Tydeus, man after my own heart, choose
your comrade for yourself--take the best man of those that have
offered, for many would now go with you. Do not through delicacy reject
the better man, and take the worst out of respect for his lineage,
because he is of more royal blood."

He said this because he feared for Menelaus. Diomed answered, "If you
bid me take the man of my own choice, how in that case can I fail to
think of Ulysses, than whom there is no man more eager to face all
kinds of danger--and Pallas Minerva loves him well? If he were to go
with me we should pass safely through fire itself, for he is quick to
see and understand."

"Son of Tydeus," replied Ulysses, "say neither good nor ill about me,
for you are among Argives who know me well. Let us be going, for the
night wanes and dawn is at hand. The stars have gone forward,
two-thirds of the night are already spent, and the third is alone left
us."

They then put on their armour. Brave Thrasymedes provided the son of
Tydeus with a sword and a shield (for he had left his own at his ship)
and on his head he set a helmet of bull's hide without either peak or
crest; it is called a skull-cap and is a common headgear. Meriones
found a bow and quiver for Ulysses, and on his head he set a leathern
helmet that was lined with a strong plaiting of leathern thongs, while
on the outside it was thickly studded with boar's teeth, well and
skilfully set into it; next the head there was an inner lining of felt.
This helmet had been stolen by Autolycus out of Eleon when he broke
into the house of Amyntor son of Ormenus. He gave it to Amphidamas of
Cythera to take to Scandea, and Amphidamas gave it as a guest-gift to
Molus, who gave it to his son Meriones; and now it was set upon the
head of Ulysses.

When the pair had armed, they set out, and left the other chieftains
behind them. Pallas Minerva sent them a heron by the wayside upon their
right hands; they could not see it for the darkness, but they heard its
cry. Ulysses was glad when he heard it and prayed to Minerva: "Hear
me," he cried, "daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, you who spy out all my
ways and who are with me in all my hardships; befriend me in this mine
hour, and grant that we may return to the ships covered with glory
after having achieved some mighty exploit that shall bring sorrow to
the Trojans."

Then Diomed of the loud war-cry also prayed: "Hear me too," said he,
"daughter of Jove, unweariable; be with me even as you were with my
noble father Tydeus when he went to Thebes as envoy sent by the
Achaeans. He left the Achaeans by the banks of the river Aesopus, and
went to the city bearing a message of peace to the Cadmeians; on his
return thence, with your help, goddess, he did great deeds of daring,
for you were his ready helper. Even so guide me and guard me now, and
in return I will offer you in sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of a year
old, unbroken, and never yet brought by man under the yoke. I will gild
her horns and will offer her up to you in sacrifice."

Thus they prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard their prayer. When they had
done praying to the daughter of great Jove, they went their way like
two lions prowling by night amid the armour and blood-stained bodies of
them that had fallen.

Neither again did Hector let the Trojans sleep; for he too called the
princes and councillors of the Trojans that he might set his counsel
before them. "Is there one," said he, "who for a great reward will do
me the service of which I will tell you? He shall be well paid if he
will. I will give him a chariot and a couple of horses, the fleetest
that can be found at the ships of the Achaeans, if he will dare this
thing; and he will win infinite honour to boot; he must go to the ships
and find out whether they are still guarded as heretofore, or whether
now that we have beaten them the Achaeans design to fly, and through
sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep their watches."

They all held their peace; but there was among the Trojans a certain
man named Dolon, son of Eumedes, the famous herald--a man rich in gold
and bronze. He was ill-favoured, but a good runner, and was an only son
among five sisters. He it was that now addressed the Trojans. "I,
Hector," said he, "Will to the ships and will exploit them. But first
hold up your sceptre and swear that you will give me the chariot,
bedight with bronze, and the horses that now carry the noble son of
Peleus. I will make you a good scout, and will not fail you. I will go
through the host from one end to the other till I come to the ship of
Agamemnon, where I take it the princes of the Achaeans are now
consulting whether they shall fight or fly."

When he had done speaking Hector held up his sceptre, and swore him his
oath saying, "May Jove the thundering husband of Juno bear witness that
no other Trojan but yourself shall mount those steeds, and that you
shall have your will with them for ever."

The oath he swore was bootless, but it made Dolon more keen on going.
He hung his bow over his shoulder, and as an overall he wore the skin
of a grey wolf, while on his head he set a cap of ferret skin. Then he
took a pointed javelin, and left the camp for the ships, but he was not
to return with any news for Hector. When he had left the horses and the
troops behind him, he made all speed on his way, but Ulysses perceived
his coming and said to Diomed, "Diomed, here is some one from the camp;
I am not sure whether he is a spy, or whether it is some thief who
would plunder the bodies of the dead; let him get a little past us, we
can then spring upon him and take him. If, however, he is too quick for
us, go after him with your spear and hem him in towards the ships away
from the Trojan camp, to prevent his getting back to the town."

With this they turned out of their way and lay down among the corpses.
Dolon suspected nothing and soon passed them, but when he had got about
as far as the distance by which a mule-plowed furrow exceeds one that
has been ploughed by oxen (for mules can plow fallow land quicker than
oxen) they ran after him, and when he heard their footsteps he stood
still, for he made sure they were friends from the Trojan camp come by
Hector's orders to bid him return; when, however, they were only a
spear's cast, or less, away from him, he saw that they were enemies and ran
as fast as his legs could take him. The others gave chase at once, and as
a couple of well-trained hounds press forward after a doe or hare that
runs screaming in front of them, even so did the son of Tydeus and
Ulysses pursue Dolon and cut him off from his own people. But when he
had fled so far towards the ships that he would soon have fallen in
with the outposts, Minerva infused fresh strength into the son of
Tydeus for fear some other of the Achaeans might have the glory of
being first to hit him, and he might himself be only second; he
therefore sprang forward with his spear and said, "Stand, or I shall
throw my spear, and in that case I shall soon make an end of you."

He threw as he spoke, but missed his aim on purpose. The dart flew over
the man's right shoulder, and then stuck in the ground. He stood stock
still, trembling and in great fear; his teeth chattered, and he turned
pale with fear. The two came breathless up to him and seized his hands,
whereon he began to weep and said, "Take me alive; I will ransom
myself; we have great store of gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from
this my father will satisfy you with a very large ransom, should he
hear of my being alive at the ships of the Achaeans."

"Fear not," replied Ulysses, "let no thought of death be in your mind;
but tell me, and tell me true, why are you thus going about alone in
the dead of night away from your camp and towards the ships, while
other men are sleeping? Is it to plunder the bodies of the slain, or
did Hector send you to spy out what was going on at the ships? Or did
you come here of your own mere notion?"

Dolon answered, his limbs trembling beneath him: "Hector, with his vain
flattering promises, lured me from my better judgement. He said he
would give me the horses of the noble son of Peleus and his
bronze-bedizened chariot; he bade me go through the darkness of the
flying night, get close to the enemy, and find out whether the ships
are still guarded as heretofore, or whether, now that we have beaten
them, the Achaeans design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are
neglecting to keep their watches."

Ulysses smiled at him and answered, "You had indeed set your heart upon
a great reward, but the horses of the descendant of Aeacus are hardly
to be kept in hand or driven by any other mortal man than Achilles
himself, whose mother was an immortal. But tell me, and tell me true,
where did you leave Hector when you started? Where lies his armour and
his horses? How, too, are the watches and sleeping-ground of the
Trojans ordered? What are their plans? Will they stay here by the ships
and away from the city, or now that they have worsted the Achaeans,
will they retire within their walls?"

And Dolon answered, "I will tell you truly all. Hector and the other
councillors are now holding conference by the monument of great Ilus,
away from the general tumult; as for the guards about which you ask me,
there is no chosen watch to keep guard over the host. The Trojans have
their watchfires, for they are bound to have them; they, therefore, are
awake and keep each other to their duty as sentinels; but the allies
who have come from other places are asleep and leave it to the Trojans
to keep guard, for their wives and children are not here."

Ulysses then said, "Now tell me; are they sleeping among the Trojan
troops, or do they lie apart? Explain this that I may understand it."

"I will tell you truly all," replied Dolon. "To the seaward lie the
Carians, the Paeonian bowmen, the Leleges, the Cauconians, and the
noble Pelasgi. The Lysians and proud Mysians, with the Phrygians and
Meonians, have their place on the side towards Thymbra; but why ask
about all this? If you want to find your way into the host of the
Trojans, there are the Thracians, who have lately come here and lie
apart from the others at the far end of the camp; and they have Rhesus
son of Eioneus for their king. His horses are the finest and strongest
that I have ever seen, they are whiter than snow and fleeter than any
wind that blows. His chariot is bedight with silver and gold, and he
has brought his marvellous golden armour, of the rarest
workmanship--too splendid for any mortal man to carry, and meet only
for the gods. Now, therefore, take me to the ships or bind me securely
here, until you come back and have proved my words whether they be
false or true."

Diomed looked sternly at him and answered, "Think not, Dolon, for all
the good information you have given us, that you shall escape now you
are in our hands, for if we ransom you or let you go, you will come
some second time to the ships of the Achaeans either as a spy or as an
open enemy, but if I kill you and an end of you, you will give no more
trouble."

On this Dolon would have caught him by the beard to beseech him
further, but Diomed struck him in the middle of his neck with his sword
and cut through both sinews so that his head fell rolling in the dust
while he was yet speaking. They took the ferret-skin cap from his head,
and also the wolf-skin, the bow, and his long spear. Ulysses hung them
up aloft in honour of Minerva the goddess of plunder, and prayed
saying, "Accept these, goddess, for we give them to you in preference
to all the gods in Olympus: therefore speed us still further towards
the horses and sleeping-ground of the Thracians."

With these words he took the spoils and set them upon a tamarisk tree,
and they marked the place by pulling up reeds and gathering boughs of
tamarisk that they might not miss it as they came back through the
flying hours of darkness. The two then went onwards amid the fallen
armour and the blood, and came presently to the company of Thracian
soldiers, who were sleeping, tired out with their day's toil; their
goodly armour was lying on the ground beside them all orderly in three
rows, and each man had his yoke of horses beside him. Rhesus was
sleeping in the middle, and hard by him his horses were made fast to
the topmost rim of his chariot. Ulysses from some way off saw him and
said, "This, Diomed, is the man, and these are the horses about which
Dolon whom we killed told us. Do your very utmost; dally not about your
armour, but loose the horses at once--or else kill the men yourself,
while I see to the horses."

Thereon Minerva put courage into the heart of Diomed, and he smote them
right and left. They made a hideous groaning as they were being hacked
about, and the earth was red with their blood. As a lion springs
furiously upon a flock of sheep or goats when he finds them without
their shepherd, so did the son of Tydeus set upon the Thracian soldiers
till he had killed twelve. As he killed them Ulysses came and drew them
aside by their feet one by one, that the horses might go forward freely
without being frightened as they passed over the dead bodies, for they
were not yet used to them. When the son of Tydeus came to the king, he
killed him too (which made thirteen), as he was breathing hard, for by
the counsel of Minerva an evil dream, the seed of Oeneus, hovered that
night over his head. Meanwhile Ulysses untied the horses, made them
fast one to another and drove them off, striking them with his bow, for
he had forgotten to take the whip from the chariot. Then he whistled as
a sign to Diomed.

But Diomed stayed where he was, thinking what other daring deed he
might accomplish. He was doubting whether to take the chariot in which
the king's armour was lying, and draw it out by the pole, or to lift
the armour out and carry it off; or whether again, he should not kill
some more Thracians. While he was thus hesitating Minerva came up to
him and said, "Get back, Diomed, to the ships or you may be driven
thither, should some other god rouse the Trojans."

Diomed knew that it was the goddess, and at once sprang upon the
horses. Ulysses beat them with his bow and they flew onward to the
ships of the Achaeans.

But Apollo kept no blind look-out when he saw Minerva with the son of
Tydeus. He was angry with her, and coming to the host of the Trojans he
roused Hippocoon, a counsellor of the Thracians and a noble kinsman of
Rhesus. He started up out of his sleep and saw that the horses were no
longer in their place, and that the men were gasping in their
death-agony; on this he groaned aloud, and called upon his friend by
name. Then the whole Trojan camp was in an uproar as the people kept
hurrying together, and they marvelled at the deeds of the heroes who
had now got away towards the ships.

When they reached the place where they had killed Hector's scout,
Ulysses stayed his horses, and the son of Tydeus, leaping to the
ground, placed the blood-stained spoils in the hands of Ulysses and
remounted: then he lashed the horses onwards, and they flew forward
nothing loth towards the ships as though of their own free will. Nestor
was first to hear the tramp of their feet. "My friends," said he,
"princes and counsellors of the Argives, shall I guess right or
wrong?--but I must say what I think: there is a sound in my ears as of
the tramp of horses. I hope it may be Diomed and Ulysses driving in
horses from the Trojans, but I much fear that the bravest of the
Argives may have come to some harm at their hands."

He had hardly done speaking when the two men came in and dismounted,
whereon the others shook hands right gladly with them and congratulated
them. Nestor knight of Gerene was first to question them. "Tell me,"
said he, "renowned Ulysses, how did you two come by these horses? Did
you steal in among the Trojan forces, or did some god meet you and give
them to you? They are like sunbeams. I am well conversant with the
Trojans, for old warrior though I am I never hold back by the ships,
but I never yet saw or heard of such horses as these are. Surely some
god must have met you and given them to you, for you are both of you
dear to Jove, and to Jove's daughter Minerva."

And Ulysses answered, "Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean
name, heaven, if it so will, can give us even better horses than these,
for the gods are far mightier than we are. These horses, however, about
which you ask me, are freshly come from Thrace. Diomed killed their
king with the twelve bravest of his companions. Hard by the ships we
took a thirteenth man--a scout whom Hector and the other Trojans had
sent as a spy upon our ships."

He laughed as he spoke and drove the horses over the ditch, while the
other Achaeans followed him gladly. When they reached the strongly
built quarters of the son of Tydeus, they tied the horses with thongs
of leather to the manger, where the steeds of Diomed stood eating their
sweet corn, but Ulysses hung the blood-stained spoils of Dolon at the
stern of his ship, that they might prepare a sacred offering to
Minerva. As for themselves, they went into the sea and washed the sweat
from their bodies, and from their necks and thighs. When the sea-water
had taken all the sweat from off them, and had refreshed them, they
went into the baths and washed themselves. After they had so done and
had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to Minerva.
