BOOK XII

  The Trojans and their allies break the wall, led on by Hector.

SO THE son of Menoetius was attending to the hurt of Eurypylus within
the tent, but the Argives and Trojans still fought desperately, nor
were the trench and the high wall above it, to keep the Trojans in
check longer. They had built it to protect their ships, and had dug the
trench all round it that it might safeguard both the ships and the rich
spoils which they had taken, but they had not offered hecatombs to the
gods. It had been built without the consent of the immortals, and
therefore it did not last. So long as Hector lived and Achilles nursed
his anger, and so long as the city of Priam remained untaken, the great
wall of the Achaeans stood firm; but when the bravest of the Trojans
were no more, and many also of the Argives, though some were yet left
alive--when, moreover, the city was sacked in the tenth year, and the
Argives had gone back with their ships to their own country--then
Neptune and Apollo took counsel to destroy the wall, and they turned on
to it the streams of all the rivers from Mount Ida into the sea,
Rhesus, Heptaporus, Caresus, Rhodius, Grenicus, Aesopus, and goodly
Scamander, with Simois, where many a shield and helm had fallen, and
many a hero of the race of demigods had bitten the dust. Phoebus Apollo
turned the mouths of all these rivers together and made them flow for
nine days against the wall, while Jove rained the whole time that he
might wash it sooner into the sea. Neptune himself, trident in hand,
surveyed the work and threw into the sea all the foundations of beams
and stones which the Achaeans had laid with so much toil; he made all
level by the mighty stream of the Hellespont, and then when he had
swept the wall away he spread a great beach of sand over the place
where it had been. This done he turned the rivers back into their old
courses.

This was what Neptune and Apollo were to do in after time; but as yet
battle and turmoil were still raging round the wall till its timbers
rang under the blows that rained upon them. The Argives, cowed by the
scourge of Jove, were hemmed in at their ships in fear of Hector the
mighty minister of Rout, who as heretofore fought with the force and
fury of a whirlwind. As a lion or wild boar turns fiercely on the dogs
and men that attack him, while these form a solid wall and shower their
javelins as they face him--his courage is all undaunted, but his high
spirit will be the death of him; many a time does he charge at his
pursuers to scatter them, and they fall back as often as he does
so--even so did Hector go about among the host exhorting his men, and
cheering them on to cross the trench.

But the horses dared not do so, and stood neighing upon its brink, for
the width frightened them. They could neither jump it nor cross it, for
it had overhanging banks all round upon either side, above which there
were the sharp stakes that the sons of the Achaeans had planted so
close and strong as a defence against all who would assail it; a horse,
therefore, could not get into it and draw his chariot after him, but
those who were on foot kept trying their very utmost. Then Polydamas
went up to Hector and said, "Hector, and you other captains of the
Trojans and allies, it is madness for us to try and drive our horses
across the trench; it will be very hard to cross, for it is full of
sharp stakes, and beyond these there is the wall. Our horses therefore
cannot get down into it, and would be of no use if they did; moreover
it is a narrow place and we should come to harm. If, indeed, great Jove
is minded to help the Trojans, and in his anger will utterly destroy
the Achaeans, I would myself gladly see them perish now and here far
from Argos; but if they should rally and we are driven back from the
ships pell-mell into the trench there will be not so much as a man get
back to the city to tell the tale. Now, therefore, let us all do as I
say; let our squires hold our horses by the trench, but let us follow
Hector in a body on foot, clad in full armour, and if the day of their
doom is at hand the Achaeans will not be able to withstand us."

Thus spoke Polydamas and his saying pleased Hector, who sprang in full
armour to the ground, and all the other Trojans, when they saw him do
so, also left their chariots. Each man then gave his horses over to his
charioteer in charge to hold them ready for him at the trench. Then
they formed themselves into companies, made themselves ready, and in
five bodies followed their leaders. Those that went with Hector and
Polydamas were the bravest and most in number, and the most determined
to break through the wall and fight at the ships. Cebriones was also
joined with them as third in command, for Hector had left his chariot
in charge of a less valiant soldier. The next company was led by Paris,
Alcathous, and Agenor; the third by Helenus and Deiphobus, two sons of
Priam, and with them was the hero Asius--Asius, the son of Hyrtacus,
whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river Selleis
had brought him from Arisbe. Aeneas, the valiant son of Anchises, led
the fourth; he and the two sons of Antenor, Archelochus and Acamas, men
well versed in all the arts of war. Sarpedon was captain over the
allies, and took with him Glaucus and Asteropaeus whom he deemed most
valiant after himself--for he was far the best man of them all. These
helped to array one another in their ox-hide shields, and then charged
straight at the Danaans, for they felt sure that they would not hold
out longer and that they should themselves now fall upon the ships.

The rest of the Trojans and their allies now followed the counsel of
Polydamas but Asius, son of Hyrtacus, would not leave his horses and
his esquire behind him; in his foolhardiness he took them on with him
towards the ships, nor did he fail to come by his end in consequence.
Nevermore was he to return to wind-beaten Ilius, exulting in his
chariot and his horses; ere he could do so, death of ill-omened name
had overshadowed him and he had fallen by the spear of Idomeneus the
noble son of Deucalion. He had driven towards the left wing of the
ships, by which way the Achaeans used to return with their chariots and
horses from the plain. Hither he drove and found the gates with their
doors opened wide, and the great bar down--for the gatemen kept them
open so as to let those of their comrades enter who might be flying
towards the ships. Hither of set purpose did he direct his horses, and
his men followed him with a loud cry, for they felt sure that the
Achaeans would not hold out longer, and that they should now fall upon
the ships. Little did they know that at the gates they should find two
of the bravest chieftains, proud sons of the fighting Lapithae--the
one, Polypoetes, mighty son of Pirithous, and the other Leonteus, peer
of murderous Mars. These stood before the gates like two high oak trees
upon the mountains, that tower from their wide-spreading roots, and
year after year battle with wind and rain--even so did these two men
await the onset of great Asius confidently and without flinching. The
Trojans led by him and by Iamenus, Orestes, Adamas the son of Asius,
Thoon and Oenomaus, raised a loud cry of battle and made straight for
the wall, holding their shields of dry ox-hide above their heads; for a
while the two defenders remained inside and cheered the Achaeans on to
stand firm in the defence of their ships; when, however, they saw that
the Trojans were attacking the wall, while the Danaans were crying out
for help and being routed, they rushed outside and fought in front of
the gates like two wild boars upon the mountains that abide the attack
of men and dogs, and charging on either side break down the wood all
round them tearing it up by the roots, and one can hear the clattering
of their tusks, till some one hits them and makes an end of them--even
so did the gleaming bronze rattle about their breasts, as the weapons
fell upon them; for they fought with great fury, trusting to their own
prowess and to those who were on the wall above them. These threw great
stones at their assailants in defence of themselves their tents and
their ships. The stones fell thick as the flakes of snow which some
fierce blast drives from the dark clouds and showers down in sheets
upon the earth--even so fell the weapons from the hands alike of
Trojans and Achaeans. Helmet and shield rang out as the great stones
rained upon them, and Asius, the son of Hyrtacus, in his dismay cried
aloud and smote his two thighs. "Father Jove," he cried, "of a truth
you too are altogether given to lying. I made sure the Argive heroes
could not withstand us, whereas like slim-waisted wasps, or bees that
have their nests in the rocks by the wayside--they leave not the holes
wherein they have built undefended, but fight for their little ones
against all who would take them--even so these men, though they be but
two, will not be driven from the gates, but stand firm either to slay
or be slain."

He spoke, but moved not the mind of Jove, whose counsel it then was to
give glory to Hector. Meanwhile the rest of the Trojans were fighting
about the other gates; I, however, am no god to be able to tell about
all these things, for the battle raged everywhere about the stone wall
as it were a fiery furnace. The Argives, discomfited though they were,
were forced to defend their ships, and all the gods who were defending
the Achaeans were vexed in spirit; but the Lapithae kept on fighting
with might and main.

Thereon Polypoetes, mighty son of Pirithous, hit Damasus with a spear
upon his cheek-pierced helmet. The helmet did not protect him, for the
point of the spear went through it, and broke the bone, so that the
brain inside was scattered about, and he died fighting. He then slew
Pylon and Ormenus. Leonteus, of the race of Mars, killed Hippomachus
the son of Antimachus by striking him with his spear upon the girdle.
He then drew his sword and sprang first upon Antiphates whom he killed
in combat, and who fell face upwards on the earth. After him he killed
Menon, Iamenus, and Orestes, and laid them low one after the other.

While they were busy stripping the armour from these heroes, the youths
who were led on by Polydamas and Hector (and these were the greater
part and the most valiant of those that were trying to break through
the wall and fire the ships) were still standing by the trench,
uncertain what they should do; for they had seen a sign from heaven
when they had essayed to cross it--a soaring eagle that flew skirting
the left wing of their host, with a monstrous blood-red snake in its
talons still alive and struggling to escape. The snake was still bent
on revenge, wriggling and twisting itself backwards till it struck the
bird that held it, on the neck and breast; whereon the bird being in
pain, let it fall, dropping it into the middle of the host, and then
flew down the wind with a sharp cry. The Trojans were struck with
terror when they saw the snake, portent of aegis-bearing Jove, writhing
in the midst of them, and Polydamas went up to Hector and said,
"Hector, at our councils of war you are ever given to rebuke me, even
when I speak wisely, as though it were not well, forsooth, that one of
the people should cross your will either in the field or at the council
board; you would have them support you always: nevertheless I will say
what I think will be best; let us not now go on to fight the Danaans at
their ships, for I know what will happen if this soaring eagle which
skirted the left wing of our host with a monstrous blood-red snake in
its talons (the snake being still alive) was really sent as an omen to
the Trojans on their essaying to cross the trench. The eagle let go her
hold; she did not succeed in taking it home to her little ones, and so
will it be--with ourselves; even though by a mighty effort we break
through the gates and wall of the Achaeans, and they give way before
us, still we shall not return in good order by the way we came, but
shall leave many a man behind us whom the Achaeans will do to death in
defence of their ships. Thus would any seer who was expert in these
matters, and was trusted by the people, read the portent."

Hector looked fiercely at him and said, "Polydamas, I like not of your
reading. You can find a better saying than this if you will. If,
however, you have spoken in good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed
you of your reason. You would have me pay no heed to the counsels of
Jove, nor to the promises he made me--and he bowed his head in
confirmation; you bid me be ruled rather by the flight of wild-fowl.
What care I whether they fly towards dawn or dark, and whether they be
on my right hand or on my left? Let us put our trust rather in the
counsel of great Jove, king of mortals and immortals. There is one
omen, and one only--that a man should fight for his country. Why are
you so fearful? Though we be all of us slain at the ships of the
Argives you are not likely to be killed yourself, for you are not
steadfast nor courageous. If you will not fight, or would talk others
over from doing so, you shall fall forthwith before my spear."

With these words he led the way, and the others followed after with a
cry that rent the air. Then Jove the lord of thunder sent the blast of
a mighty wind from the mountains of Ida, that bore the dust down
towards the ships; he thus lulled the Achaeans into security, and gave
victory to Hector and to the Trojans, who, trusting to their own might
and to the signs he had shown them, essayed to break through the great
wall of the Achaeans. They tore down the breastworks from the walls,
and overthrew the battlements; they upheaved the buttresses, which the
Achaeans had set in front of the wall in order to support it; when they
had pulled these down they made sure of breaking through the wall, but
the Danaans still showed no sign of giving ground; they still fenced
the battlements with their shields of ox-hide, and hurled their
missiles down upon the foe as soon as any came below the wall.

The two Ajaxes went about everywhere on the walls cheering on the
Achaeans, giving fair words to some while they spoke sharply to any one
whom they saw to be remiss. "My friends," they cried, "Argives one and
all--good bad and indifferent, for there was never fight yet, in which
all were of equal prowess--there is now work enough, as you very well
know, for all of you. See that you none of you turn in flight towards
the ships, daunted by the shouting of the foe, but press forward and
keep one another in heart, if it may so be that Olympian Jove the lord
of lightning will vouchsafe us to repel our foes, and drive them back
towards the city."

Thus did the two go about shouting and cheering the Achaeans on. As the
flakes that fall thick upon a winter's day, when Jove is minded to snow
and to display these his arrows to mankind--he lulls the wind to rest,
and snows hour after hour till he has buried the tops of the high
mountains, the headlands that jut into the sea, the grassy plains, and
the tilled fields of men; the snow lies deep upon the forelands, and
havens of the grey sea, but the waves as they come rolling in stay it
that it can come no further, though all else is wrapped as with a
mantle, so heavy are the heavens with snow--even thus thickly did the
stones fall on one side and on the other, some thrown at the Trojans,
and some by the Trojans at the Achaeans; and the whole wall was in an
uproar.

Still the Trojans and brave Hector would not yet have broken down the
gates and the great bar, had not Jove turned his son Sarpedon against
the Argives as a lion against a herd of horned cattle. Before him he
held his shield of hammered bronze, that the smith had beaten so fair
and round, and had lined with ox hides which he had made fast with
rivets of gold all round the shield; this he held in front of him, and
brandishing his two spears came on like some lion of the wilderness,
who has been long famished for want of meat and will dare break even
into a well-fenced homestead to try and get at the sheep. He may find
the shepherds keeping watch over their flocks with dogs and spears, but
he is in no mind to be driven from the fold till he has had a try for
it; he will either spring on a sheep and carry it off, or be hit by a
spear from some strong hand--even so was Sarpedon fain to attack the
wall and break down its battlements. Then he said to Glaucus son of
Hippolochus, "Glaucus, why in Lycia do we receive especial honour as
regards our place at table? Why are the choicest portions served us and
our cups kept brimming, and why do men look up to us as though we were
gods? Moreover we hold a large estate by the banks of the river
Xanthus, fair with orchard lawns and wheat-growing land; it becomes us,
therefore, to take our stand at the head of all the Lycians and bear
the brunt of the fight, that one may say to another, 'Our princes in
Lycia eat the fat of the land and drink best of wine, but they are fine
fellows; they fight well and are ever at the front in battle.' My good
friend, if, when we were once out of this fight, we could escape old
age and death thenceforward and forever, I should neither press forward
myself nor bid you do so, but death in ten thousand shapes hangs ever
over our heads, and no man can elude him; therefore let us go forward
and either win glory for ourselves, or yield it to another."

Glaucus heeded his saying, and the pair forthwith led on the host of
Lycians. Menestheus son of Peteos was dismayed when he saw them, for it
was against his part of the wall that they came--bringing destruction
with them; he looked along the wall for some chieftain to support his
comrades and saw the two Ajaxes, men ever eager for the fray, and
Teucer, who had just come from his tent, standing near them; but he
could not make his voice heard by shouting to them, so great an uproar
was there from crashing shields and helmets and the battering of gates
with a din which reached the skies. For all the gates had been closed,
and the Trojans were hammering at them to try and break their way
through them. Menestheus, therefore, sent Thootes with a message to
Ajax. "Run, good Thootes," he said, "and call Ajax, or better still bid
both come, for it will be all over with us here directly; the leaders
of the Lycians are upon us, men who have ever fought desperately
heretofore. But if they have too much on their hands to let them come,
at any rate let Ajax son of Telamon do so, and let Teucer, the famous
bowman, come with him."

The messenger did as he was told, and set off running along the wall of
the Achaeans. When he reached the Ajaxes he said to them, "Sirs,
princes of the Argives, the son of noble Peteos bids you come to him
for a while and help him. You had better both come if you can, or it
will be all over with him directly; the leaders of the Lycians are upon
him, men who have ever fought desperately heretofore; if you have too
much on your hands to let both come, at any rate let Ajax, son of
Telamon, do so, and let Teucer, the famous bowman, come with him."

Great Ajax son of Telamon heeded the message, and at once spoke to the
son of Oileus. "Ajax," said he, "do you two, yourself and brave
Lycomedes, stay here and keep the Danaans in heart to fight their
hardest. I will go over yonder, and bear my part in the fray, but I
will come back here at once as soon as I have given them the help they
need."

With this, Ajax son of Telamon set off, and Teucer, his brother by the
same father, went also, with Pandion to carry Teucer's bow. They went
along inside the wall, and when they came to the tower where Menestheus
was (and hard pressed indeed did they find him) the brave captains and
leaders of the Lycians were storming the battlements as it were a thick
dark cloud, fighting in close quarters, and raising the battle-cry
aloud.

First, Ajax son of Telamon killed brave Epicles, a comrade of Sarpedon,
hitting him with a jagged stone that lay by the battlements at the very
top of the wall. As men now are, even one who is in the bloom of youth
could hardly lift it with his two hands, but Ajax raised it high aloft
and flung it down, smashing Epicles' four-crested helmet so that the
bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell from the high
wall as though he were diving, with no more life left in him. Then
Teucer wounded Glaucus the brave son of Hippolochus as he was coming on
to attack the wall. He saw his shoulder bare and aimed an arrow at it,
which made Glaucus leave off fighting. Thereon he sprang covertly down
for fear some of the Achaeans might see that he was wounded and taunt
him. Sarpedon was stung with grief when he saw Glaucus leave him, still
he did not leave off fighting, but aimed his spear at Alcmaon the son
of Thestor and hit him. He drew his spear back again and Alcmaon came
down headlong after it with his bronzed armour rattling round him. Then
Sarpedon seized the battlement in his strong hands, and tugged at it
till it all gave way together, and a breach was made through which many
might pass.

Ajax and Teucer then both of them attacked him. Teucer hit him with an
arrow on the band that bore the shield which covered his body, but Jove
saved his son from destruction that he might not fall by the ships'
sterns. Meanwhile Ajax sprang on him and pierced his shield, but the
spear did not go clean through, though it hustled him back that he
could come on no further. He therefore retired a little space from the
battlement, yet without losing all his ground, for he still thought to
cover himself with glory. Then he turned round and shouted to the brave
Lycians saying, "Lycians, why do you thus fail me? For all my prowess I
cannot break through the wall and open a way to the ships
single-handed. Come close on behind me, for the more there are of us
the better."

The Lycians, shamed by his rebuke, pressed closer round him who was
their counsellor and their king. The Argives on their part got their
men in fighting order within the wall, and there was a deadly struggle
between them. The Lycians could not break through the wall and force
their way to the ships, nor could the Danaans drive the Lycians from
the wall now that they had once reached it. As two men, measuring-rods
in hand, quarrel about their boundaries in a field that they own in
common, and stickle for their rights though they be but in a mere
strip, even so did the battlements now serve as a bone of contention,
and they beat one another's round shields for their possession. Many a
man's body was wounded with the pitiless bronze, as he turned round and
bared his back to the foe, and many were struck clean through their
shields; the wall and battlements were everywhere deluged with the
blood alike of Trojans and of Achaeans. But even so the Trojans could
not rout the Achaeans, who still held on; and as some honest
hard-working woman weighs wool in her balance and sees that the scales
be true, for she would gain some pitiful earnings for her little ones,
even so was the fight balanced evenly between them till the time came
when Jove gave the greater glory to Hector son of Priam, who was first
to spring towards the wall of the Achaeans. When he had done so, he
cried aloud to the Trojans, "Up, Trojans, break the wall of the
Argives, and fling fire upon their ships."

Thus did he hound them on, and in one body they rushed straight at the
wall as he had bidden them, and scaled the battlements with sharp
spears in their hands. Hector laid hold of a stone that lay just
outside the gates and was thick at one end but pointed at the other;
two of the best men in a town, as men now are, could hardly raise it
from the ground and put it on to a waggon, but Hector lifted it quite
easily by himself, for the son of scheming Saturn made it light for
him. As a shepherd picks up a ram's fleece with one hand and finds it
no burden, so easily did Hector lift the great stone and drive it right
at the doors that closed the gates so strong and so firmly set. These
doors were double and high, and were kept closed by two cross-bars to
which there was but one key. When he had got close up to them, Hector
strode towards them that his blow might gain in force and struck them
in the middle, leaning his whole weight against them. He broke both
hinges, and the stone fell inside by reason of its great weight. The
portals re-echoed with the sound, the bars held no longer, and the
doors flew open, one one way, and the other the other, through the
force of the blow. Then brave Hector leaped inside with a face as dark
as that of flying night. The gleaming bronze flashed fiercely about his
body and he had two spears in his hand. None but a god could have
withstood him as he flung himself into the gateway, and his eyes glared
like fire. Then he turned round towards the Trojans and called on them
to scale the wall, and they did as he bade them--some of them at once
climbing over the wall, while others passed through the gates. The
Danaans then fled panic-stricken towards their ships, and all was
uproar and confusion.
