BOOK XXIII

  The funeral of Patroclus, and the funeral games.

Thus did they make their moan throughout the city, while the Achaeans
when they reached the Hellespont went back every man to his own ship.
But Achilles would not let the Myrmidons go, and spoke to his brave
comrades saying, "Myrmidons, famed horsemen and my own trusted friends,
not yet, forsooth, let us unyoke, but with horse and chariot draw near
to the body and mourn Patroclus, in due honour to the dead. When we
have had full comfort of lamentation we will unyoke our horses and take
supper all of us here."

On this they all joined in a cry of wailing and Achilles led them in
their lament. Thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing round
the body, and Thetis stirred within them a still deeper yearning. The
sands of the seashore and the men's armour were wet with their weeping,
so great a minister of fear was he whom they had lost. Chief in all
their mourning was the son of Peleus: he laid his bloodstained hand on
the breast of his friend. "Fare well," he cried, "Patroclus, even in
the house of Hades. I will now do all that I erewhile promised you; I
will drag Hector hither and let dogs devour him raw; twelve noble sons
of Trojans will I also slay before your pyre to avenge you."

As he spoke he treated the body of noble Hector with contumely, laying
it at full length in the dust beside the bier of Patroclus. The others
then put off every man his armour, took the horses from their chariots,
and seated themselves in great multitude by the ship of the fleet
descendant of Aeacus, who thereon feasted them with an abundant funeral
banquet. Many a goodly ox, with many a sheep and bleating goat did they
butcher and cut up; many a tusked boar moreover, fat and well-fed, did
they singe and set to roast in the flames of Vulcan; and rivulets of
blood flowed all round the place where the body was lying.

Then the princes of the Achaeans took the son of Peleus to Agamemnon,
but hardly could they persuade him to come with them, so wroth was he
for the death of his comrade. As soon as they reached Agamemnon's tent
they told the serving-men to set a large tripod over the fire in case
they might persuade the son of Peleus to wash the clotted gore from
this body, but he denied them sternly, and swore it with a solemn oath,
saying, "Nay, by King Jove, first and mightiest of all gods, it is not
meet that water should touch my body, till I have laid Patroclus on the
flames, have built him a barrow, and shaved my head--for so long as I
live no such second sorrow shall ever draw nigh me. Now, therefore, let
us do all that this sad festival demands, but at break of day, King
Agamemnon, bid your men bring wood, and provide all else that the dead
may duly take into the realm of darkness; the fire shall thus burn him
out of our sight the sooner, and the people shall turn again to their
own labours."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They made haste to
prepare the meal, they ate, and every man had his full share so that
all were satisfied. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
the others went to their rest each in his own tent, but the son of
Peleus lay grieving among his Myrmidons by the shore of the sounding
sea, in an open place where the waves came surging in one after
another. Here a very deep slumber took hold upon him and eased the
burden of his sorrows, for his limbs were weary with chasing Hector
round windy Ilius. Presently the sad spirit of Patroclus drew near him,
like what he had been in stature, voice, and the light of his beaming
eyes, clad, too, as he had been clad in life. The spirit hovered over
his head and said--

"You sleep, Achilles, and have forgotten me; you loved me living, but
now that I am dead you think for me no further. Bury me with all speed
that I may pass the gates of Hades; the ghosts, vain shadows of men
that can labour no more, drive me away from them; they will not yet
suffer me to join those that are beyond the river, and I wander all
desolate by the wide gates of the house of Hades. Give me now your hand
I pray you, for when you have once given me my dues of fire, never
shall I again come forth out of the house of Hades. Nevermore shall we
sit apart and take sweet counsel among the living; the cruel fate which
was my birth-right has yawned its wide jaws around me--nay, you too
Achilles, peer of gods, are doomed to die beneath the wall of the noble
Trojans.

"One prayer more will I make you, if you will grant it; let not my
bones be laid apart from yours, Achilles, but with them; even as we
were brought up together in your own home, what time Menoetius brought
me to you as a child from Opoeis because by a sad spite I had killed
the son of Amphidamas--not of set purpose, but in childish quarrel over
the dice. The knight Peleus took me into his house, entreated me
kindly, and named me to be your squire; therefore let our bones lie in
but a single urn, the two-handled golden vase given to you by your
mother."

And Achilles answered, "Why, true heart, are you come hither to lay
these charges upon me? I will of my own self do all as you have bidden
me. Draw closer to me, let us once more throw our arms around one
another, and find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows."

He opened his arms towards him as he spoke and would have clasped him
in them, but there was nothing, and the spirit vanished as a vapour,
gibbering and whining into the earth. Achilles sprang to his feet,
smote his two hands, and made lamentation saying, "Of a truth even in
the house of Hades there are ghosts and phantoms that have no life in
them; all night long the sad spirit of Patroclus has hovered over head
making piteous moan, telling me what I am to do for him, and looking
wondrously like himself."

Thus did he speak and his words set them all weeping and mourning about
the poor dumb dead, till rosy-fingered morn appeared. Then King
Agamemnon sent men and mules from all parts of the camp, to bring wood,
and Meriones, squire to Idomeneus, was in charge over them. They went
out with woodmen's axes and strong ropes in their hands, and before
them went the mules. Up hill and down dale did they go, by straight
ways and crooked, and when they reached the heights of many-fountained
Ida, they laid their axes to the roots of many a tall branching oak
that came thundering down as they felled it. They split the trees and
bound them behind the mules, which then wended their way as they best
could through the thick brushwood on to the plain. All who had been
cutting wood bore logs, for so Meriones squire to Idomeneus had bidden
them, and they threw them down in a line upon the seashore at the place
where Achilles would make a mighty monument for Patroclus and for
himself.

When they had thrown down their great logs of wood over the whole
ground, they stayed all of them where they were, but Achilles ordered
his brave Myrmidons to gird on their armour, and to yoke each man his
horses; they therefore rose, girded on their armour and mounted each
his chariot--they and their charioteers with them. The chariots went
before, and they that were on foot followed as a cloud in their tens of
thousands after. In the midst of them his comrades bore Patroclus and
covered him with the locks of their hair which they cut off and threw
upon his body. Last came Achilles with his head bowed for sorrow, so
noble a comrade was he taking to the house of Hades.

When they came to the place of which Achilles had told them they laid
the body down and built up the wood. Achilles then bethought him of
another matter. He went a space away from the pyre, and cut off the
yellow lock which he had let grow for the river Spercheius. He looked
all sorrowfully out upon the dark sea, and said, "Spercheius, in vain
did my father Peleus vow to you that when I returned home to my loved
native land I should cut off this lock and offer you a holy hecatomb;
fifty she-goats was I to sacrifice to you there at your springs, where
is your grove and your altar fragrant with burnt-offerings. Thus did my
father vow, but you have not fulfilled his prayer; now, therefore, that
I shall see my home no more, I give this lock as a keepsake to the hero
Patroclus."

As he spoke he placed the lock in the hands of his dear comrade, and
all who stood by were filled with yearning and lamentation. The sun
would have gone down upon their mourning had not Achilles presently
said to Agamemnon, "Son of Atreus, for it is to you that the people
will give ear, there is a time to mourn and a time to cease from
mourning; bid the people now leave the pyre and set about getting their
dinners: we, to whom the dead is dearest, will see to what is wanted
here, and let the other princes also stay by me."

When King Agamemnon heard this he dismissed the people to their ships,
but those who were about the dead heaped up wood and built a pyre a
hundred feet this way and that; then they laid the dead all sorrowfully
upon the top of it. They flayed and dressed many fat sheep and oxen
before the pyre, and Achilles took fat from all of them and wrapped the
body therein from head to foot, heaping the flayed carcases all round
it. Against the bier he leaned two-handled jars of honey and unguents;
four proud horses did he then cast upon the pyre, groaning the while he
did so. The dead hero had had house-dogs; two of them did Achilles slay
and threw upon the pyre; he also put twelve brave sons of noble Trojans
to the sword and laid them with the rest, for he was full of bitterness
and fury. Then he committed all to the resistless and devouring might
of the fire; he groaned aloud and called on his dead comrade by name.
"Fare well," he cried, "Patroclus, even in the house of Hades; I am now
doing all that I have promised you. Twelve brave sons of noble Trojans
shall the flames consume along with yourself, but dogs, not fire, shall
devour the flesh of Hector son of Priam."

Thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of Hector, for
Jove's daughter Venus kept them off him night and day, and anointed him
with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh might not be torn when
Achilles was dragging him about. Phoebus Apollo moreover sent a dark
cloud from heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where
Hector lay, that the heat of the sun might not parch his body.

Now the pyre about dead Patroclus would not kindle. Achilles therefore
bethought him of another matter; he went apart and prayed to the two
winds Boreas and Zephyrus vowing them goodly offerings. He made them
many drink-offerings from the golden cup and besought them to come and
help him that the wood might make haste to kindle and the dead bodies
be consumed. Fleet Iris heard him praying and started off to fetch the
winds. They were holding high feast in the house of boisterous Zephyrus
when Iris came running up to the stone threshold of the house and stood
there, but as soon as they set eyes on her they all came towards her
and each of them called her to him, but Iris would not sit down. "I
cannot stay," she said, "I must go back to the streams of Oceanus and
the land of the Ethiopians who are offering hecatombs to the immortals,
and I would have my share; but Achilles prays that Boreas and shrill
Zephyrus will come to him, and he vows them goodly offerings; he would
have you blow upon the pyre of Patroclus for whom all the Achaeans are
lamenting."

With this she left them, and the two winds rose with a cry that rent
the air and swept the clouds before them. They blew on and on until
they came to the sea, and the waves rose high beneath them, but when
they reached Troy they fell upon the pyre till the mighty flames roared
under the blast that they blew. All night long did they blow hard and
beat upon the fire, and all night long did Achilles grasp his double
cup, drawing wine from a mixing-bowl of gold, and calling upon the
spirit of dead Patroclus as he poured it upon the ground until the
earth was drenched. As a father mourns when he is burning the bones of
his bridegroom son whose death has wrung the hearts of his parents,
even so did Achilles mourn while burning the body of his comrade,
pacing round the bier with piteous groaning and lamentation.

At length as the Morning Star was beginning to herald the light which
saffron-mantled Dawn was soon to suffuse over the sea, the flames fell
and the fire began to die. The winds then went home beyond the Thracian
sea, which roared and boiled as they swept over it. The son of Peleus
now turned away from the pyre and lay down, overcome with toil, till he
fell into a sweet slumber. Presently they who were about the son of
Atreus drew near in a body, and roused him with the noise and tramp of
their coming. He sat upright and said, "Son of Atreus, and all other
princes of the Achaeans, first pour red wine everywhere upon the fire
and quench it; let us then gather the bones of Patroclus son of
Menoetius, singling them out with care; they are easily found, for they
lie in the middle of the pyre, while all else, both men and horses, has
been thrown in a heap and burned at the outer edge. We will lay the
bones in a golden urn, in two layers of fat, against the time when I
shall myself go down into the house of Hades. As for the barrow, labour
not to raise a great one now, but such as is reasonable. Afterwards,
let those Achaeans who may be left at the ships when I am gone, build
it both broad and high."

Thus he spoke and they obeyed the word of the son of Peleus. First they
poured red wine upon the thick layer of ashes and quenched the fire.
With many tears they singled out the whitened bones of their loved
comrade and laid them within a golden urn in two layers of fat: they
then covered the urn with a linen cloth and took it inside the tent.
They marked off the circle where the barrow should be, made a
foundation for it about the pyre, and forthwith heaped up the earth.
When they had thus raised a mound they were going away, but Achilles
stayed the people and made them sit in assembly. He brought prizes from
the ships--cauldrons, tripods, horses and mules, noble oxen, women with
fair girdles, and swart iron.

The first prize he offered was for the chariot races--a woman skilled
in all useful arts, and a three-legged cauldron that had ears for
handles, and would hold twenty-two measures. This was for the man who
came in first. For the second there was a six-year old mare, unbroken,
and in foal to a he-ass; the third was to have a goodly cauldron that
had never yet been on the fire; it was still bright as when it left the
maker, and would hold four measures. The fourth prize was two talents
of gold, and the fifth a two-handled urn as yet unsoiled by smoke. Then
he stood up and spoke among the Argives saying--

"Son of Atreus, and all other Achaeans, these are the prizes that lie
waiting the winners of the chariot races. At any other time I should
carry off the first prize and take it to my own tent; you know how far
my steeds excel all others--for they are immortal; Neptune gave them to
my father Peleus, who in his turn gave them to myself; but I shall hold
aloof, I and my steeds that have lost their brave and kind driver, who
many a time has washed them in clear water and anointed their manes
with oil. See how they stand weeping here, with their manes trailing on
the ground in the extremity of their sorrow. But do you others set
yourselves in order throughout the host, whosoever has confidence in
his horses and in the strength of his chariot."

Thus spoke the son of Peleus and the drivers of chariots bestirred
themselves. First among them all uprose Eumelus, king of men, son of
Admetus, a man excellent in horsemanship. Next to him rose mighty
Diomed son of Tydeus; he yoked the Trojan horses which he had taken
from Aeneas, when Apollo bore him out of the fight. Next to him,
yellow-haired Menelaus son of Atreus rose and yoked his fleet horses,
Agamemnon's mare Aethe, and his own horse Podargus. The mare had been
given to Agamemnon by Echepolus son of Anchises, that he might not have
to follow him to Ilius, but might stay at home and take his ease; for
Jove had endowed him with great wealth and he lived in spacious Sicyon.
This mare, all eager for the race, did Menelaus put under the yoke.

Fourth in order Antilochus, son to noble Nestor son of Neleus, made
ready his horses. These were bred in Pylos, and his father came up to
him to give him good advice of which, however, he stood in but little
need. "Antilochus," said Nestor, "you are young, but Jove and Neptune
have loved you well, and have made you an excellent horseman. I need
not therefore say much by way of instruction. You are skilful at
wheeling your horses round the post, but the horses themselves are very
slow, and it is this that will, I fear, mar your chances. The other
drivers know less than you do, but their horses are fleeter; therefore,
my dear son, see if you cannot hit upon some artifice whereby you may
insure that the prize shall not slip through your fingers. The woodman
does more by skill than by brute force; by skill the pilot guides his
storm-tossed barque over the sea, and so by skill one driver can beat
another. If a man go wide in rounding this way and that, whereas a man
who knows what he is doing may have worse horses, but he will keep them
well in hand when he sees the doubling-post; he knows the precise
moment at which to pull the rein, and keeps his eye well on the man in
front of him. I will give you this certain token which cannot escape
your notice. There is a stump of a dead tree--oak or pine as it may
be--some six feet above the ground, and not yet rotted away by rain; it
stands at the fork of the road; it has two white stones set one on each
side, and there is a clear course all round it. It may have been a
monument to some one long since dead, or it may have been used as a
doubling-post in days gone by; now, however, it has been fixed on by
Achilles as the mark round which the chariots shall turn; hug it as
close as you can, but as you stand in your chariot lean over a little
to the left; urge on your right-hand horse with voice and lash, and
give him a loose rein, but let the left-hand horse keep so close in,
that the nave of your wheel shall almost graze the post; but mind the
stone, or you will wound your horses and break your chariot in pieces,
which would be sport for others but confusion for yourself. Therefore,
my dear son, mind well what you are about, for if you can be first to
round the post there is no chance of any one giving you the go-by
later, not even though you had Adrestus's horse Arion behind you--a
horse which is of divine race--or those of Laomedon, which are the
noblest in this country."

When Nestor had made an end of counselling his son he sat down in his
place, and fifth in order Meriones got ready his horses. They then all
mounted their chariots and cast lots. Achilles shook the helmet, and
the lot of Antilochus son of Nestor fell out first; next came that of
King Eumelus, and after his, those of Menelaus son of Atreus and of
Meriones. The last place fell to the lot of Diomed son of Tydeus, who
was the best man of them all. They took their places in line; Achilles
showed them the doubling-post round which they were to turn, some way
off upon the plain; here he stationed his father's follower Phoenix as
umpire, to note the running, and report truly.

At the same instant they all of them lashed their horses, struck them
with the reins, and shouted at them with all their might. They flew
full speed over the plain away from the ships, the dust rose from under
them as it were a cloud or whirlwind, and their manes were all flying
in the wind. At one moment the chariots seemed to touch the ground, and
then again they bounded into the air; the drivers stood erect, and
their hearts beat fast and furious in their lust of victory. Each kept
calling on his horses, and the horses scoured the plain amid the clouds
of dust that they raised.

It was when they were doing the last part of the course on their way
back towards the sea that their pace was strained to the utmost and it
was seen what each could do. The horses of the descendant of Pheres now
took the lead, and close behind them came the Trojan stallions of
Diomed. They seemed as if about to mount Eumelus's chariot, and he
could feel their warm breath on his back and on his broad shoulders,
for their heads were close to him as they flew over the course. Diomed
would have now passed him, or there would have been a dead heat, but
Phoebus Apollo to spite him made him drop his whip. Tears of anger fell
from his eyes as he saw the mares going on faster than ever, while his
own horses lost ground through his having no whip. Minerva saw the
trick which Apollo had played the son of Tydeus, so she brought him his
whip and put spirit into his horses; moreover she went after the son of
Admetus in a rage and broke his yoke for him; the mares went one to one
side of the course, and the other to the other, and the pole was broken
against the ground. Eumelus was thrown from his chariot close to the
wheel; his elbows, mouth, and nostrils were all torn, and his forehead
was bruised above his eyebrows; his eyes filled with tears and he could
find no utterance. But the son of Tydeus turned his horses aside and
shot far ahead, for Minerva put fresh strength into them and covered
Diomed himself with glory.

Menelaus son of Atreus came next behind him, but Antilochus called to
his father's horses. "On with you both," he cried, "and do your very
utmost. I do not bid you try to beat the steeds of the son of Tydeus,
for Minerva has put running into them, and has covered Diomed with
glory; but you must overtake the horses of the son of Atreus and not be
left behind, or Aethe who is so fleet will taunt you. Why, my good
fellows, are you lagging? I tell you, and it shall surely be--Nestor
will keep neither of you, but will put both of you to the sword, if we
win any the worse a prize through your carelessness. Fly after them at
your utmost speed; I will hit on a plan for passing them in a narrow
part of the way, and it shall not fail me."

They feared the rebuke of their master, and for a short space went
quicker. Presently Antilochus saw a narrow place where the road had
sunk. The ground was broken, for the winter's rain had gathered and had
worn the road so that the whole place was deepened. Menelaus was making
towards it so as to get there first, for fear of a foul, but Antilochus
turned his horses out of the way, and followed him a little on one
side. The son of Atreus was afraid and shouted out, "Antilochus, you
are driving recklessly; rein in your horses; the road is too narrow
here, it will be wider soon, and you can pass me then; if you foul my
chariot you may bring both of us to a mischief."

But Antilochus plied his whip, and drove faster, as though he had not
heard him. They went side by side for about as far as a young man can
hurl a disc from his shoulder when he is trying his strength, and then
Menelaus's mares drew behind, for he left off driving for fear the
horses should foul one another and upset the chariots; thus, while
pressing on in quest of victory, they might both come headlong to the
ground. Menelaus then upbraided Antilochus and said, "There is no
greater trickster living than you are; go, and bad luck go with you;
the Achaeans say not well that you have understanding, and come what
may you shall not bear away the prize without sworn protest on my part."

Then he called on his horses and said to them, "Keep your pace, and
slacken not; the limbs of the other horses will weary sooner than
yours, for they are neither of them young."

The horses feared the rebuke of their master, and went faster, so that
they were soon nearly up with the others.

Meanwhile the Achaeans from their seats were watching how the horses
went, as they scoured the plain amid clouds of their own dust.
Idomeneus captain of the Cretans was first to make out the running, for
he was not in the thick of the crowd, but stood on the most commanding
part of the ground. The driver was a long way off, but Idomeneus could
hear him shouting, and could see the foremost horse quite plainly--a
chestnut with a round white star, like the moon, on its forehead. He
stood up and said among the Argives, "My friends, princes and
counsellors of the Argives, can you see the running as well as I can?
There seems to be another pair in front now, and another driver; those
that led off at the start must have been disabled out on the plain. I
saw them at first making their way round the doubling-post, but now,
though I search the plain of Troy, I cannot find them. Perhaps the
reins fell from the driver's hand so that he lost command of his horses
at the doubling-post, and could not turn it. I suppose he must have
been thrown out there, and broken his chariot, while his mares have
left the course and gone off wildly in a panic. Come up and see for
yourselves, I cannot make out for certain, but the driver seems an
Aetolian by descent, ruler over the Argives, brave Diomed the son of
Tydeus."

Ajax the son of Oileus took him up rudely and said, "Idomeneus, why
should you be in such a hurry to tell us all about it, when the mares
are still so far out upon the plain? You are none of the youngest, nor
your eyes none of the sharpest, but you are always laying down the law.
You have no right to do so, for there are better men here than you are.
Eumelus's horses are in front now, as they always have been, and he is
on the chariot holding the reins."

The captain of the Cretans was angry, and answered, "Ajax you are an
excellent railer, but you have no judgement, and are wanting in much
else as well, for you have a vile temper. I will wager you a tripod or
cauldron, and Agamemnon son of Atreus shall decide whose horses are
first. You will then know to your cost."

Ajax son of Oileus was for making him an angry answer, and there would
have been yet further brawling between them, had not Achilles risen in
his place and said, "Cease your railing, Ajax and Idomeneus; it is not
seemly; you would be scandalised if you saw any one else do the like:
sit down and keep your eyes on the horses; they are speeding towards
the winning-post and will be here directly. You will then both of you
know whose horses are first, and whose come after."

As he was speaking, the son of Tydeus came driving in, plying his whip
lustily from his shoulder, and his horses stepping high as they flew
over the course. The sand and grit rained thick on the driver, and the
chariot inlaid with gold and tin ran close behind his fleet horses.
There was little trace of wheel-marks in the fine dust, and the horses
came flying in at their utmost speed. Diomed stayed them in the middle
of the crowd, and the sweat from their manes and chests fell in streams
on to the ground. Forthwith he sprang from his goodly chariot, and
leaned his whip against his horses' yoke; brave Sthenelus now lost no
time, but at once brought on the prize, and gave the woman and the
ear-handled cauldron to his comrades to take away. Then he unyoked the
horses.

Next after him came in Antilochus of the race of Neleus, who had passed
Menelaus by a trick and not by the fleetness of his horses; but even so
Menelaus came in as close behind him as the wheel is to the horse that
draws both the chariot and its master. The end hairs of a horse's tail
touch the tyre of the wheel, and there is never much space between
wheel and horse when the chariot is going; Menelaus was no further than
this behind Antilochus, though at first he had been a full disc's throw
behind him. He had soon caught him up again, for Agamemnon's mare Aethe
kept pulling stronger and stronger, so that if the course had been
longer he would have passed him, and there would not even have been a
dead heat. Idomeneus's brave squire Meriones was about a spear's cast
behind Menelaus. His horses were slowest of all, and he was the worst
driver. Last of them all came the son of Admetus, dragging his chariot
and driving his horses on in front. When Achilles saw him he was sorry,
and stood up among the Argives saying, "The best man is coming in last.
Let us give him a prize for it is reasonable. He shall have the second,
but the first must go to the son of Tydeus."

Thus did he speak and the others all of them applauded his saying, and
were for doing as he had said, but Nestor's son Antilochus stood up and
claimed his rights from the son of Peleus. "Achilles," said he, "I
shall take it much amiss if you do this thing; you would rob me of my
prize, because you think Eumelus's chariot and horses were thrown out,
and himself too, good man that he is. He should have prayed duly to the
immortals; he would not have come in last if he had done so. If you are
sorry for him and so choose, you have much gold in your tents, with
bronze, sheep, cattle and horses. Take something from this store if you
would have the Achaeans speak well of you, and give him a better prize
even than that which you have now offered; but I will not give up the
mare, and he that will fight me for her, let him come on."

Achilles smiled as he heard this, and was pleased with Antilochus, who
was one of his dearest comrades. So he said--

"Antilochus, if you would have me find Eumelus another prize, I will
give him the bronze breastplate with a rim of tin running all round it
which I took from Asteropaeus. It will be worth much money to him."

He bade his comrade Automedon bring the breastplate from his tent, and
he did so. Achilles then gave it over to Eumelus, who received it
gladly.

But Menelaus got up in a rage, furiously angry with Antilochus. An
attendant placed his staff in his hands and bade the Argives keep
silence: the hero then addressed them. "Antilochus," said he, "what is
this from you who have been so far blameless? You have made me cut a
poor figure and baulked my horses by flinging your own in front of
them, though yours are much worse than mine are; therefore, O princes
and counsellors of the Argives, judge between us and show no favour,
lest one of the Achaeans say, 'Menelaus has got the mare through lying
and corruption; his horses were far inferior to Antilochus's, but he
has greater weight and influence.' Nay, I will determine the matter
myself, and no man will blame me, for I shall do what is just. Come
here, Antilochus, and stand, as our custom is, whip in hand before your
chariot and horses; lay your hand on your steeds, and swear by
earth-encircling Neptune that you did not purposely and guilefully get
in the way of my horses."

And Antilochus answered, "Forgive me; I am much younger, King Menelaus,
than you are; you stand higher than I do and are the better man of the
two; you know how easily young men are betrayed into indiscretion;
their tempers are more hasty and they have less judgement; make due
allowances therefore, and bear with me; I will of my own accord give up
the mare that I have won, and if you claim any further chattel from my
own possessions, I would rather yield it to you, at once, than fall
from your good graces henceforth, and do wrong in the sight of heaven."

The son of Nestor then took the mare and gave her over to Menelaus,
whose anger was thus appeased; as when dew falls upon a field of
ripening corn, and the lands are bristling with the harvest--even so, O
Menelaus, was your heart made glad within you. He turned to Antilochus
and said, "Now, Antilochus, angry though I have been, I can give way to
you of my own free will; you have never been headstrong nor
ill-disposed hitherto, but this time your youth has got the better of
your judgement; be careful how you outwit your betters in future; no
one else could have brought me round so easily, but your good father,
your brother, and yourself have all of you had infinite trouble on my
behalf; I therefore yield to your entreaty, and will give up the mare
to you, mine though it indeed be; the people will thus see that I am
neither harsh nor vindictive."

With this he gave the mare over to Antilochus's comrade Noemon, and
then took the cauldron. Meriones, who had come in fourth, carried off
the two talents of gold, and the fifth prize, the two-handled urn,
being unawarded, Achilles gave it to Nestor, going up to him among the
assembled Argives and saying, "Take this, my good old friend, as an
heirloom and memorial of the funeral of Patroclus--for you shall see
him no more among the Argives. I give you this prize though you cannot
win one; you can now neither wrestle nor fight, and cannot enter for
the javelin-match nor foot-races, for the hand of age has been laid
heavily upon you."

So saying he gave the urn over to Nestor, who received it gladly and
answered, "My son, all that you have said is true; there is no strength
now in my legs and feet, nor can I hit out with my hands from either
shoulder. Would that I were still young and strong as when the Epeans
were burying King Amarynceus in Buprasium, and his sons offered prizes
in his honour. There was then none that could vie with me neither of
the Epeans nor the Pylians themselves nor the Aetolians. In boxing I
overcame Clytomedes son of Enops, and in wrestling, Ancaeus of Pleuron
who had come forward against me. Iphiclus was a good runner, but I beat
him, and threw farther with my spear than either Phyleus or Polydorus.
In chariot-racing alone did the two sons of Actor surpass me by
crowding their horses in front of me, for they were angry at the way
victory had gone, and at the greater part of the prizes remaining in
the place in which they had been offered. They were twins, and the one
kept on holding the reins, and holding the reins, while the other plied
the whip. Such was I then, but now I must leave these matters to
younger men; I must bow before the weight of years, but in those days I
was eminent among heroes. And now, sir, go on with the funeral contests
in honour of your comrade: gladly do I accept this urn, and my heart
rejoices that you do not forget me but are ever mindful of my goodwill
towards you, and of the respect due to me from the Achaeans. For all
which may the grace of heaven be vouchsafed you in great abundance."

Thereon the son of Peleus, when he had listened to all the thanks of
Nestor, went about among the concourse of the Achaeans, and presently
offered prizes for skill in the painful art of boxing. He brought out a
strong mule, and made it fast in the middle of the crowd--a she-mule
never yet broken, but six years old--when it is hardest of all to break
them: this was for the victor, and for the vanquished he offered a
double cup. Then he stood up and said among the Argives, "Son of
Atreus, and all other Achaeans, I invite our two champion boxers to lay
about them lustily and compete for these prizes. He to whom Apollo
vouchsafes the greater endurance, and whom the Achaeans acknowledge as
victor, shall take the mule back with him to his own tent, while he
that is vanquished shall have the double cup."

As he spoke there stood up a champion both brave and of great stature,
a skilful boxer, Epeus, son of Panopeus. He laid his hand on the mule
and said, "Let the man who is to have the cup come hither, for none but
myself will take the mule. I am the best boxer of all here present, and
none can beat me. Is it not enough that I should fall short of you in
actual fighting? Still, no man can be good at everything. I tell you
plainly, and it shall come true; if any man will box with me I will
bruise his body and break his bones; therefore let his friends stay
here in a body and be at hand to take him away when I have done with
him."

They all held their peace, and no man rose save Euryalus son of
Mecisteus, who was son of Talaus. Mecisteus went once to Thebes after
the fall of Oedipus, to attend his funeral, and he beat all the people
of Cadmus. The son of Tydeus was Euryalus's second, cheering him on and
hoping heartily that he would win. First he put a waistband round him
and then he gave him some well-cut thongs of ox-hide; the two men being
now girt went into the middle of the ring, and immediately fell to;
heavily indeed did they punish one another and lay about them with
their brawny fists. One could hear the horrid crashing of their jaws,
and they sweated from every pore of their skin. Presently Epeus came on
and gave Euryalus a blow on the jaw as he was looking round; Euryalus
could not keep his legs; they gave way under him in a moment and he
sprang up with a bound, as a fish leaps into the air near some shore
that is all bestrewn with sea-wrack, when Boreas furs the top of the
waves, and then falls back into deep water. But noble Epeus caught hold
of him and raised him up; his comrades also came round him and led him
from the ring, unsteady in his gait, his head hanging on one side, and
spitting great clots of gore. They set him down in a swoon and then
went to fetch the double cup.

The son of Peleus now brought out the prizes for the third contest and
showed them to the Argives. These were for the painful art of
wrestling. For the winner there was a great tripod ready for setting
upon the fire, and the Achaeans valued it among themselves at twelve
oxen. For the loser he brought out a woman skilled in all manner of
arts, and they valued her at four oxen. He rose and said among the
Argives, "Stand forward, you who will essay this contest."

Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, and crafty Ulysses,
full of wiles, rose also. The two girded themselves and went into the
middle of the ring. They gripped each other in their strong hands like
the rafters which some master-builder frames for the roof of a high
house to keep the wind out. Their backbones cracked as they tugged at
one another with their mighty arms--and sweat rained from them in
torrents. Many a bloody weal sprang up on their sides and shoulders,
but they kept on striving with might and main for victory and to win
the tripod. Ulysses could not throw Ajax, nor Ajax him; Ulysses was too
strong for him; but when the Achaeans began to tire of watching them,
Ajax said to Ulysses, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall either
lift me, or I you, and let Jove settle it between us."

He lifted him from the ground as he spoke, but Ulysses did not forget
his cunning. He hit Ajax in the hollow at back of his knee, so that he
could not keep his feet, but fell on his back with Ulysses lying upon
his chest, and all who saw it marvelled. Then Ulysses in turn lifted
Ajax and stirred him a little from the ground but could not lift him
right off it, his knee sank under him, and the two fell side by side on
the ground and were all begrimed with dust. They now sprang towards one
another and were for wrestling yet a third time, but Achilles rose and
stayed them. "Put not each other further," said he, "to such cruel
suffering; the victory is with both alike, take each of you an equal
prize, and let the other Achaeans now compete."

Thus did he speak and they did even as he had said, and put on their
shirts again after wiping the dust from off their bodies.

The son of Peleus then offered prizes for speed in running--a
mixing-bowl beautifully wrought, of pure silver. It would hold six
measures, and far exceeded all others in the whole world for beauty; it
was the work of cunning artificers in Sidon, and had been brought into
port by Phoenicians from beyond the sea, who had made a present of it
to Thoas. Eueneus son of Jason had given it to Patroclus in ransom of
Priam's son Lycaon, and Achilles now offered it as a prize in honour of
his comrade to him who should be the swiftest runner. For the second
prize he offered a large ox, well fattened, while for the last there
was to be half a talent of gold. He then rose and said among the
Argives, "Stand forward, you who will essay this contest."

Forthwith uprose fleet Ajax son of Oileus, with cunning Ulysses, and
Nestor's son Antilochus, the fastest runner among all the youth of his
time. They stood side by side and Achilles showed them the goal. The
course was set out for them from the starting-post, and the son of
Oileus took the lead at once, with Ulysses as close behind him as the
shuttle is to a woman's bosom when she throws the woof across the warp
and holds it close up to her; even so close behind him was
Ulysses--treading in his footprints before the dust could settle there,
and Ajax could feel his breath on the back of his head as he ran
swiftly on. The Achaeans all shouted applause as they saw him straining
his utmost, and cheered him as he shot past them; but when they were
now nearing the end of the course Ulysses prayed inwardly to Minerva.
"Hear me," he cried, "and help my feet, O goddess." Thus did he pray,
and Pallas Minerva heard his prayer; she made his hands and his feet
feel light, and when the runners were at the point of pouncing upon the
prize, Ajax, through Minerva's spite slipped upon some offal that was
lying there from the cattle which Achilles had slaughtered in honour of
Patroclus, and his mouth and nostrils were all filled with cow dung.
Ulysses therefore carried off the mixing-bowl, for he got before Ajax
and came in first. But Ajax took the ox and stood with his hand on one
of its horns, spitting the dung out of his mouth. Then he said to the
Argives, "Alas, the goddess has spoiled my running; she watches over
Ulysses and stands by him as though she were his own mother." Thus did
he speak and they all of them laughed heartily.

Antilochus carried off the last prize and smiled as he said to the
bystanders, "You all see, my friends, that now too the gods have shown
their respect for seniority. Ajax is somewhat older than I am, and as
for Ulysses, he belongs to an earlier generation, but he is hale in
spite of his years, and no man of the Achaeans can run against him save
only Achilles."

He said this to pay a compliment to the son of Peleus, and Achilles
answered, "Antilochus, you shall not have praised me to no purpose; I
shall give you an additional half talent of gold." He then gave the
half talent to Antilochus, who received it gladly.

Then the son of Peleus brought out the spear, helmet and shield that
had been borne by Sarpedon, and were taken from him by Patroclus. He
stood up and said among the Argives, "We bid two champions put on their
armour, take their keen blades, and make trial of one another in the
presence of the multitude; whichever of them can first wound the flesh
of the other, cut through his armour, and draw blood, to him will I
give this goodly Thracian sword inlaid with silver, which I took from
Asteropaeus, but the armour let both hold in partnership, and I will
give each of them a hearty meal in my own tent."

Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, as also mighty Diomed
son of Tydeus. When they had put on their armour each on his own side
of the ring, they both went into the middle eager to engage, and with
fire flashing from their eyes. The Achaeans marvelled as they beheld
them, and when the two were now close up with one another, thrice did
they spring forward and thrice try to strike each other in close
combat. Ajax pierced Diomed's round shield, but did not draw blood, for
the cuirass beneath the shield protected him; thereon the son of Tydeus
from over his huge shield kept aiming continually at Ajax's neck with
the point of his spear, and the Achaeans alarmed for his safety bade
them leave off fighting and divide the prize between them. Achilles
then gave the great sword to the son of Tydeus, with its scabbard, and
the leathern belt with which to hang it.

Achilles next offered the massive iron quoit which mighty Eetion had
erewhile been used to hurl, until Achilles had slain him and carried it
off in his ships along with other spoils. He stood up and said among
the Argives, "Stand forward, you who would essay this contest. He who
wins it will have a store of iron that will last him five years as they
go rolling round, and if his fair fields lie far from a town his
shepherd or ploughman will not have to make a journey to buy iron, for
he will have a stock of it on his own premises."

Then uprose the two mighty men Polypoetes and Leonteus, with Ajax son
of Telamon and noble Epeus. They stood up one after the other and Epeus
took the quoit, whirled it, and flung it from him, which set all the
Achaeans laughing. After him threw Leonteus of the race of Mars. Ajax
son of Telamon threw third, and sent the quoit beyond any mark that had
been made yet, but when mighty Polypoetes took the quoit he hurled it
as though it had been a stockman's stick which he sends flying about
among his cattle when he is driving them, so far did his throw
out-distance those of the others. All who saw it roared applause, and
his comrades carried the prize for him and set it on board his ship.

Achilles next offered a prize of iron for archery--ten double-edged
axes and ten with single edges: he set up a ship's mast, some way off
upon the sands, and with a fine string tied a pigeon to it by the foot;
this was what they were to aim at. "Whoever," he said, "can hit the
pigeon shall have all the axes and take them away with him; he who hits
the string without hitting the bird will have taken a worse aim and
shall have the single-edged axes."

Then uprose King Teucer, and Meriones the stalwart squire of Idomeneus
rose also, They cast lots in a bronze helmet and the lot of Teucer fell
first. He let fly with his arrow forthwith, but he did not promise
hecatombs of firstling lambs to King Apollo, and missed his bird, for
Apollo foiled his aim; but he hit the string with which the bird was
tied, near its foot; the arrow cut the string clean through so that it
hung down towards the ground, while the bird flew up into the sky, and
the Achaeans shouted applause. Meriones, who had his arrow ready while
Teucer was aiming, snatched the bow out of his hand, and at once
promised that he would sacrifice a hecatomb of firstling lambs to
Apollo lord of the bow; then espying the pigeon high up under the
clouds, he hit her in the middle of the wing as she was circling
upwards; the arrow went clean through the wing and fixed itself in the
ground at Meriones' feet, but the bird perched on the ship's mast
hanging her head and with all her feathers drooping; the life went out
of her, and she fell heavily from the mast. Meriones, therefore, took
all ten double-edged axes, while Teucer bore off the single-edged ones
to his ships.

Then the son of Peleus brought in a spear and a cauldron that had never
been on the fire; it was worth an ox, and was chased with a pattern of
flowers; and those that throw the javelin stood up--to wit the son of
Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, and Meriones, stalwart squire of
Idomeneus. But Achilles spoke saying, "Son of Atreus, we know how far
you excel all others both in power and in throwing the javelin; take
the cauldron back with you to your ships, but if it so please you, let
us give the spear to Meriones; this at least is what I should myself
wish."

King Agamemnon assented. So he gave the bronze spear to Meriones, and
handed the goodly cauldron to Talthybius his esquire.
