BOOK XVII

  The fight around the body of Patroclus.

BRAVE Menelaus son of Atreus now came to know that Patroclus had
fallen, and made his way through the front ranks clad in full armour to
bestride him. As a cow stands lowing over her first calf, even so did
yellow-haired Menelaus bestride Patroclus. He held his round shield and
his spear in front of him, resolute to kill any who should dare face
him. But the son of Panthous had also noted the body, and came up to
Menelaus saying, "Menelaus, son of Atreus, draw back, leave the body,
and let the bloodstained spoils be. I was first of the Trojans and
their brave allies to drive my spear into Patroclus, let me, therefore,
have my full glory among the Trojans, or I will take aim and kill you."

To this Menelaus answered in great anger "By father Jove, boasting is
an ill thing. The pard is not more bold, nor the lion nor savage
wild-boar, which is fiercest and most dauntless of all creatures, than
are the proud sons of Panthous. Yet Hyperenor did not see out the days
of his youth when he made light of me and withstood me, deeming me the
meanest soldier among the Danaans. His own feet never bore him back to
gladden his wife and parents. Even so shall I make an end of you too,
if you withstand me; get you back into the crowd and do not face me, or
it shall be worse for you. Even a fool may be wise after the event."

Euphorbus would not listen, and said, "Now indeed, Menelaus, shall you
pay for the death of my brother over whom you vaunted, and whose wife
you widowed in her bridal chamber, while you brought grief unspeakable
on his parents. I shall comfort these poor people if I bring your head
and armour and place them in the hands of Panthous and noble Phrontis.
The time is come when this matter shall be fought out and settled, for
me or against me."

As he spoke he struck Menelaus full on the shield, but the spear did
not go through, for the shield turned its point. Menelaus then took
aim, praying to father Jove as he did so; Euphorbus was drawing back,
and Menelaus struck him about the roots of his throat, leaning his
whole weight on the spear, so as to drive it home. The point went clean
through his neck, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell
heavily to the ground. His hair which was like that of the Graces, and
his locks so deftly bound in bands of silver and gold, were all
bedrabbled with blood. As one who has grown a fine young olive tree in
a clear space where there is abundance of water--the plant is full of
promise, and though the winds beat upon it from every quarter it puts
forth its white blossoms till the blasts of some fierce hurricane sweep
down upon it and level it with the ground--even so did Menelaus strip
the fair youth Euphorbus of his armour after he had slain him. Or as
some fierce lion upon the mountains in the pride of his strength
fastens on the finest heifer in a herd as it is feeding--first he
breaks her neck with his strong jaws, and then gorges on her blood and
entrails; dogs and shepherds raise a hue and cry against him, but they
stand aloof and will not come close to him, for they are pale with
fear--even so no one had the courage to face valiant Menelaus. The son
of Atreus would have then carried off the armour of the son of Panthous
with ease, had not Phoebus Apollo been angry, and in the guise of
Mentes chief of the Cicons incited Hector to attack him. "Hector," said
he, "you are now going after the horses of the noble son of Aeacus, but
you will not take them; they cannot be kept in hand and driven by
mortal man, save only by Achilles, who is son to an immortal mother.
Meanwhile Menelaus son of Atreus has bestridden the body of Patroclus
and killed the noblest of the Trojans, Euphorbus son of Panthous, so
that he can fight no more."

The god then went back into the toil and turmoil, but the soul of
Hector was darkened with a cloud of grief; he looked along the ranks
and saw Euphorbus lying on the ground with the blood still flowing from
his wound, and Menelaus stripping him of his armour. On this he made
his way to the front like a flame of fire, clad in his gleaming armour,
and crying with a loud voice. When the son of Atreus heard him, he said
to himself in his dismay, "Alas! what shall I do? I may not let the
Trojans take the armour of Patroclus who has fallen fighting on my
behalf, lest some Danaan who sees me should cry shame upon me. Still if
for my honour's sake I fight Hector and the Trojans single-handed, they
will prove too many for me, for Hector is bringing them up in force.
Why, however, should I thus hesitate? When a man fights in despite of
heaven with one whom a god befriends, he will soon rue it. Let no
Danaan think ill of me if I give place to Hector, for the hand of
heaven is with him. Yet, if I could find Ajax, the two of us would
fight Hector and heaven too, if we might only save the body of
Patroclus for Achilles son of Peleus. This, of many evils would be the
least."

While he was thus in two minds, the Trojans came up to him with Hector
at their head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about
like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a
stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks
sulkily off--even so did Menelaus son of Atreus turn and leave the body
of Patroclus. When among the body of his men, he looked around for
mighty Ajax son of Telamon, and presently saw him on the extreme left
of the fight, cheering on his men and exhorting them to keep on
fighting, for Phoebus Apollo had spread a great panic among them. He
ran up to him and said, "Ajax, my good friend, come with me at once to
dead Patroclus, if so be that we may take the body to Achilles--as for
his armour, Hector already has it."

These words stirred the heart of Ajax, and he made his way among the
front ranks, Menelaus going with him. Hector had stripped Patroclus of
his armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his head and take the
body to fling before the dogs of Troy. But Ajax came up with his shield
like wall before him, on which Hector withdrew under shelter of his
men, and sprang on to his chariot, giving the armour over to the
Trojans to take to the city, as a great trophy for himself; Ajax,
therefore, covered the body of Patroclus with his broad shield and
bestrode him; as a lion stands over his whelps if hunters have come
upon him in a forest when he is with his little ones--in the pride and
fierceness of his strength he draws his knit brows down till they cover
his eyes--even so did Ajax bestride the body of Patroclus, and by his
side stood Menelaus son of Atreus, nursing great sorrow in his heart.

Then Glaucus son of Hippolochus looked fiercely at Hector and rebuked
him sternly. "Hector," said he, "you make a brave show, but in fight
you are sadly wanting. A runaway like yourself has no claim to so great
a reputation. Think how you may now save your town and citadel by the
hands of your own people born in Ilius; for you will get no Lycians to
fight for you, seeing what thanks they have had for their incessant
hardships. Are you likely, sir, to do anything to help a man of less
note, after leaving Sarpedon, who was at once your guest and comrade in
arms, to be the spoil and prey of the Danaans? So long as he lived he
did good service both to your city and yourself; yet you had no stomach
to save his body from the dogs. If the Lycians will listen to me, they
will go home and leave Troy to its fate. If the Trojans had any of that
daring fearless spirit which lays hold of men who are fighting for
their country and harassing those who would attack it, we should soon
bear off Patroclus into Ilius. Could we get this dead man away and
bring him into the city of Priam, the Argives would readily give up the
armour of Sarpedon, and we should get his body to boot. For he whose
squire has been now killed is the foremost man at the ships of the
Achaeans--he and his close-fighting followers. Nevertheless you dared
not make a stand against Ajax, nor face him, eye to eye, with battle
all round you, for he is a braver man than you are."

Hector scowled at him and answered, "Glaucus, you should know better. I
have held you so far as a man of more understanding than any in all
Lycia, but now I despise you for saying that I am afraid of Ajax. I
fear neither battle nor the din of chariots, but Jove's will is
stronger than ours; Jove at one time makes even a strong man draw back
and snatches victory from his grasp, while at another he will set him
on to fight. Come hither then, my friend, stand by me and see indeed
whether I shall play the coward the whole day through as you say, or
whether I shall not stay some even of the boldest Danaans from fighting
round the body of Patroclus."

As he spoke he called loudly on the Trojans saying, "Trojans, Lycians,
and Dardanians, fighters in close combat, be men, my friends, and fight
might and main, while I put on the goodly armour of Achilles, which I
took when I killed Patroclus."

With this Hector left the fight, and ran full speed after his men who
were taking the armour of Achilles to Troy, but had not yet got far.
Standing for a while apart from the woeful fight, he changed his
armour. His own he sent to the strong city of Ilius and to the Trojans,
while he put on the immortal armour of the son of Peleus, which the
gods had given to Peleus, who in his age gave it to his son; but the
son did not grow old in his father's armour.

When Jove, lord of the storm-cloud, saw Hector standing aloof and
arming himself in the armour of the son of Peleus, he wagged his head
and muttered to himself saying, "A! poor wretch, you arm in the armour
of a hero, before whom many another trembles, and you reck nothing of
the doom that is already close upon you. You have killed his comrade so
brave and strong, but it was not well that you should strip the armour
from his head and shoulders. I do indeed endow you with great might
now, but as against this you shall not return from battle to lay the
armour of the son of Peleus before Andromache."

The son of Saturn bowed his portentous brows, and Hector fitted the
armour to his body, while terrible Mars entered into him, and filled
his whole body with might and valour. With a shout he strode in among
the allies, and his armour flashed about him so that he seemed to all
of them like the great son of Peleus himself. He went about among them
and cheered them on--Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, Thersilochus,
Asteropaeus, Deisenor and Hippothous, Phorcys, Chromius and Ennomus the
augur. All these did he exhort saying, "Hear me, allies from other
cities who are here in your thousands, it was not in order to have a
crowd about me that I called you hither each from his several city, but
that with heart and soul you might defend the wives and little ones of
the Trojans from the fierce Achaeans. For this do I oppress my people
with your food and the presents that make you rich. Therefore turn, and
charge at the foe, to stand or fall as is the game of war; whoever
shall bring Patroclus, dead though he be, into the hands of the
Trojans, and shall make Ajax give way before him, I will give him one
half of the spoils while I keep the other. He will thus share like
honour with myself."

When he had thus spoken they charged full weight upon the Danaans with
their spears held out before them, and the hopes of each ran high that
he should force Ajax son of Telamon to yield up the body--fools that
they were, for he was about to take the lives of many. Then Ajax said
to Menelaus, "My good friend Menelaus, you and I shall hardly come out
of this fight alive. I am less concerned for the body of Patroclus, who
will shortly become meat for the dogs and vultures of Troy, than for
the safety of my own head and yours. Hector has wrapped us round in a
storm of battle from every quarter, and our destruction seems now
certain. Call then upon the princes of the Danaans if there is any who
can hear us."

Menelaus did as he said, and shouted to the Danaans for help at the top
of his voice. "My friends," he cried, "princes and counsellors of the
Argives, all you who with Agamemnon and Menelaus drink at the public
cost, and give orders each to his own people as Jove vouchsafes him
power and glory, the fight is so thick about me that I cannot
distinguish you severally; come on, therefore, every man unbidden, and
think it shame that Patroclus should become meat and morsel for Trojan
hounds."

Fleet Ajax son of Oileus heard him and was first to force his way
through the fight and run to help him. Next came Idomeneus and Meriones
his esquire, peer of murderous Mars. As for the others that came into
the fight after these, who of his own self could name them?

The Trojans with Hector at their head charged in a body. As a great
wave that comes thundering in at the mouth of some heaven-born river,
and the rocks that jut into the sea ring with the roar of the breakers
that beat and buffet them--even with such a roar did the Trojans come
on; but the Achaeans in singleness of heart stood firm about the son of
Menoetius, and fenced him with their bronze shields. Jove, moreover,
hid the brightness of their helmets in a thick cloud, for he had borne
no grudge against the son of Menoetius while he was still alive and
squire to the descendant of Aeacus; therefore he was loth to let him
fall a prey to the dogs of his foes the Trojans, and urged his comrades
on to defend him.

At first the Trojans drove the Achaeans back, and they withdrew from
the dead man daunted. The Trojans did not succeed in killing any one,
nevertheless they drew the body away. But the Achaeans did not lose it
long, for Ajax, foremost of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus
alike in stature and prowess, quickly rallied them and made towards the
front like a wild boar upon the mountains when he stands at bay in the
forest glades and routs the hounds and lusty youths that have attacked
him--even so did Ajax son of Telamon passing easily in among the
phalanxes of the Trojans, disperse those who had bestridden Patroclus
and were most bent on winning glory by dragging him off to their city.
At this moment Hippothous brave son of the Pelasgian Lethus, in his
zeal for Hector and the Trojans, was dragging the body off by the foot
through the press of the fight, having bound a strap round the sinews
near the ancle; but a mischief soon befell him from which none of those
could save him who would have gladly done so, for the son of Telamon
sprang forward and smote him on his bronze-cheeked helmet. The plumed
headpiece broke about the point of the weapon, struck at once by the
spear and by the strong hand of Ajax, so that the bloody brain came
oozing out through the crest-socket. His strength then failed him and
he let Patroclus' foot drop from his hand, as he fell full length dead
upon the body; thus he died far from the fertile land of Larissa, and
never repaid his parents the cost of bringing him up, for his life was
cut short early by the spear of mighty Ajax. Hector then took aim at
Ajax with a spear, but he saw it coming and just managed to avoid it;
the spear passed on and struck Schedius son of noble Iphitus, captain
of the Phoceans, who dwelt in famed Panopeus and reigned over much
people; it struck him under the middle of the collar-bone the bronze
point went right through him, coming out at the bottom of his
shoulder-blade, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell
heavily to the ground. Ajax in his turn struck noble Phorcys son of
Phaenops in the middle of the belly as he was bestriding Hippothous,
and broke the plate of his cuirass; whereon the spear tore out his
entrails and he clutched the ground in his palm as he fell to earth.
Hector and those who were in the front rank then gave ground, while the
Argives raised a loud cry of triumph, and drew off the bodies of
Phorcys and Hippothous which they stripped presently of their armour.

The Trojans would now have been worsted by the brave Achaeans and
driven back to Ilius through their own cowardice, while the Argives, so
great was their courage and endurance, would have achieved a triumph
even against the will of Jove, if Apollo had not roused Aeneas, in the
likeness of Periphas son of Epytus, an attendant who had grown old in
the service of Aeneas' aged father, and was at all times devoted to
him. In his likeness, then, Apollo said, "Aeneas, can you not manage,
even though heaven be against us, to save high Ilius? I have known men,
whose numbers, courage, and self-reliance have saved their people in
spite of Jove, whereas in this case he would much rather give victory
to us than to the Danaans, if you would only fight instead of being so
terribly afraid."

Aeneas knew Apollo when he looked straight at him, and shouted to
Hector saying, "Hector and all other Trojans and allies, shame on us if
we are beaten by the Achaeans and driven back to Ilius through our own
cowardice. A god has just come up to me and told me that Jove the
supreme disposer will be with us. Therefore let us make for the
Danaans, that it may go hard with them ere they bear away dead
Patroclus to the ships."

As he spoke he sprang out far in front of the others, who then rallied
and again faced the Achaeans. Aeneas speared Leiocritus son of Arisbas,
a valiant follower of Lycomedes, and Lycomedes was moved with pity as
he saw him fall; he therefore went close up, and speared Apisaon son of
Hippasus shepherd of his people in the liver under the midriff, so that
he died; he had come from fertile Paeonia and was the best man of them
all after Asteropaeus. Asteropaeus flew forward to avenge him and
attack the Danaans, but this might no longer be, inasmuch as those
about Patroclus were well covered by their shields, and held their
spears in front of them, for Ajax had given them strict orders that no
man was either to give ground, or to stand out before the others, but
all were to hold well together about the body and fight hand to hand.
Thus did huge Ajax bid them, and the earth ran red with blood as the
corpses fell thick on one another alike on the side of the Trojans and
allies, and on that of the Danaans; for these last, too, fought no
bloodless fight though many fewer of them perished, through the care
they took to defend and stand by one another.

Thus did they fight as it were a flaming fire; it seemed as though it
had gone hard even with the sun and moon, for they were hidden over all
that part where the bravest heroes were fighting about the dead son of
Menoetius, whereas the other Danaans and Achaeans fought at their ease
in full daylight with brilliant sunshine all round them, and there was
not a cloud to be seen neither on plain nor mountain. These last
moreover would rest for a while and leave off fighting, for they were
some distance apart and beyond the range of one another's weapons,
whereas those who were in the thick of the fray suffered both from
battle and darkness. All the best of them were being worn out by the
great weight of their armour, but the two valiant heroes, Thrasymedes
and Antilochus, had not yet heard of the death of Patroclus, and
believed him to be still alive and leading the van against the Trojans;
they were keeping themselves in reserve against the death or rout of
their own comrades, for so Nestor had ordered when he sent them from
the ships into battle.

Thus through the livelong day did they wage fierce war, and the sweat
of their toil rained ever on their legs under them, and on their hands
and eyes, as they fought over the squire of the fleet son of Peleus. It
was as when a man gives a great ox-hide all drenched in fat to his men,
and bids them stretch it; whereon they stand round it in a ring and tug
till the moisture leaves it, and the fat soaks in for the many that
pull at it, and it is well stretched--even so did the two sides tug the
dead body hither and thither within the compass of but a little
space--the Trojans steadfastly set on dragging it into Ilius, while the
Achaeans were no less so on taking it to their ships; and fierce was
the fight between them. Not Mars himself the lord of hosts, nor yet
Minerva, even in their fullest fury could make light of such a battle.

Such fearful turmoil of men and horses did Jove on that day ordain
round the body of Patroclus. Meanwhile Achilles did not know that he
had fallen, for the fight was under the wall of Troy a long way off the
ships. He had no idea, therefore, that Patroclus was dead, and deemed
that he would return alive as soon as he had gone close up to the
gates. He knew that he was not to sack the city neither with nor
without himself, for his mother had often told him this when he had sat
alone with her, and she had informed him of the counsels of great Jove.
Now, however, she had not told him how great a disaster had befallen
him in the death of the one who was far dearest to him of all his
comrades.

The others still kept on charging one another round the body with their
pointed spears and killing each other. Then would one say, "My friends,
we can never again show our faces at the ships--better, and greatly
better, that earth should open and swallow us here in this place, than
that we should let the Trojans have the triumph of bearing off
Patroclus to their city."

The Trojans also on their part spoke to one another saying, "Friends,
though we fall to a man beside this body, let none shrink from
fighting." With such words did they exhort each other. They fought and
fought, and an iron clank rose through the void air to the brazen vault
of heaven. The horses of the descendant of Aeacus stood out of the
fight and wept when they heard that their driver had been laid low by
the hand of murderous Hector. Automedon, valiant son of Diores, lashed
them again and again; many a time did he speak kindly to them, and many
a time did he upbraid them, but they would neither go back to the ships
by the waters of the broad Hellespont, nor yet into battle among the
Achaeans; they stood with their chariot stock still, as a pillar set
over the tomb of some dead man or woman, and bowed their heads to the
ground. Hot tears fell from their eyes as they mourned the loss of
their charioteer, and their noble manes drooped all wet from under the
yokestraps on either side the yoke.

The son of Saturn saw them and took pity upon their sorrow. He wagged
his head, and muttered to himself, saying, "Poor things, why did we
give you to King Peleus who is a mortal, while you are yourselves
ageless and immortal? Was it that you might share the sorrows that
befall mankind? for of all creatures that live and move upon the earth
there is none so pitiable as he is--still, Hector son of Priam shall
drive neither you nor your chariot. I will not have it. It is enough
that he should have the armour over which he vaunts so vainly.
Furthermore I will give you strength of heart and limb to bear
Automedon safely to the ships from battle, for I shall let the Trojans
triumph still further, and go on killing till they reach the ships;
whereon night shall fall and darkness overshadow the land."

As he spoke he breathed heart and strength into the horses so that they
shook the dust from out of their manes, and bore their chariot swiftly
into the fight that raged between Trojans and Achaeans. Behind them
fought Automedon full of sorrow for his comrade, as a vulture amid a
flock of geese. In and out, and here and there, full speed he dashed
amid the throng of the Trojans, but for all the fury of his pursuit he
killed no man, for he could not wield his spear and keep his horses in
hand when alone in the chariot; at last, however, a comrade, Alcimedon,
son of Laerces son of Haemon caught sight of him and came up behind his
chariot. "Automedon," said he, "what god has put this folly into your
heart and robbed you of your right mind, that you fight the Trojans in
the front rank single-handed? He who was your comrade is slain, and
Hector plumes himself on being armed in the armour of the descendant of
Aeacus."

Automedon son of Diores answered, "Alcimedon, there is no one else who
can control and guide the immortal steeds so well as you can, save only
Patroclus--while he was alive--peer of gods in counsel. Take then the
whip and reins, while I go down from the car and fight."

Alcimedon sprang on to the chariot, and caught up the whip and reins,
while Automedon leaped from off the car. When Hector saw him he said to
Aeneas who was near him, "Aeneas, counsellor of the mail-clad Trojans,
I see the steeds of the fleet son of Aeacus come into battle with weak
hands to drive them. I am sure, if you think well, that we might take
them; they will not dare face us if we both attack them."

The valiant son of Anchises was of the same mind, and the pair went
right on, with their shoulders covered under shields of tough dry
ox-hide, overlaid with much bronze. Chromius and Aretus went also with
them, and their hearts beat high with hope that they might kill the men
and capture the horses--fools that they were, for they were not to
return scatheless from their meeting with Automedon, who prayed to
father Jove and was forthwith filled with courage and strength
abounding. He turned to his trusty comrade Alcimedon and said,
"Alcimedon, keep your horses so close up that I may feel their breath
upon my back; I doubt that we shall not stay Hector son of Priam till
he has killed us and mounted behind the horses; he will then either
spread panic among the ranks of the Achaeans, or himself be killed
among the foremost."

On this he cried out to the two Ajaxes and Menelaus, "Ajaxes captains
of the Argives, and Menelaus, give the dead body over to them that are
best able to defend it, and come to the rescue of us living; for Hector
and Aeneas who are the two best men among the Trojans, are pressing us
hard in the full tide of war. Nevertheless the issue lies on the lap of
heaven, I will therefore hurl my spear and leave the rest to Jove."

He poised and hurled as he spoke, whereon the spear struck the round
shield of Aretus, and went right through it for the shield stayed it
not, so that it was driven through his belt into the lower part of his
belly. As when some sturdy youth, axe in hand, deals his blow behind
the horns of an ox and severs the tendons at the back of its neck so
that it springs forward and then drops, even so did Aretus give one
bound and then fall on his back the spear quivering in his body till it
made an end of him. Hector then aimed a spear at Automedon but he saw
it coming and stooped forward to avoid it, so that it flew past him and
the point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering
till Mars robbed it of its force. They would then have fought hand to
hand with swords had not the two Ajaxes forced their way through the
crowd when they heard their comrade calling, and parted them for all
their fury--for Hector, Aeneas, and Chromius were afraid and drew back,
leaving Aretus to lie there struck to the heart. Automedon, peer of
fleet Mars, then stripped him of his armour and vaunted over him
saying, "I have done little to assuage my sorrow for the son of
Menoetius, for the man I have killed is not so good as he was."

As he spoke he took the blood-stained spoils and laid them upon his
chariot; then he mounted the car with his hands and feet all steeped in
gore as a lion that has been gorging upon a bull.

And now the fierce groanful fight again raged about Patroclus, for
Minerva came down from heaven and roused its fury by the command of
far-seeing Jove, who had changed his mind and sent her to encourage the
Danaans. As when Jove bends his bright bow in heaven in token to
mankind either of war or of the chill storms that stay men from their
labour and plague the flocks--even so, wrapped in such radiant raiment,
did Minerva go in among the host and speak man by man to each. First
she took the form and voice of Phoenix and spoke to Menelaus son of
Atreus, who was standing near her. "Menelaus," said she, "it will be
shame and dishonour to you, if dogs tear the noble comrade of Achilles
under the walls of Troy. Therefore be staunch, and urge your men to be
so also."

Menelaus answered, "Phoenix, my good old friend, may Minerva vouchsafe
me strength and keep the darts from off me, for so shall I stand by
Patroclus and defend him; his death has gone to my heart, but Hector is
as a raging fire and deals his blows without ceasing, for Jove is now
granting him a time of triumph."

Minerva was pleased at his having named herself before any of the other
gods. Therefore she put strength into his knees and shoulders, and made
him as bold as a fly, which, though driven off will yet come again and
bite if it can, so dearly does it love man's blood--even so bold as
this did she make him as he stood over Patroclus and threw his spear.
Now there was among the Trojans a man named Podes, son of Eetion, who
was both rich and valiant. Hector held him in the highest honour for he
was his comrade and boon companion; the spear of Menelaus struck this
man in the girdle just as he had turned in flight, and went right
through him. Whereon he fell heavily forward, and Menelaus son of
Atreus drew off his body from the Trojans into the ranks of his own
people.

Apollo then went up to Hector and spurred him on to fight, in the
likeness of Phaenops son of Asius who lived in Abydos and was the most
favoured of all Hector's guests. In his likeness Apollo said, "Hector,
who of the Achaeans will fear you henceforward now that you have
quailed before Menelaus who has ever been rated poorly as a soldier?
Yet he has now got a corpse away from the Trojans single-handed, and
has slain your own true comrade, a man brave among the foremost, Podes
son of Eetion."

A dark cloud of grief fell upon Hector as he heard, and he made his way
to the front clad in full armour. Thereon the son of Saturn seized his
bright tasselled aegis, and veiled Ida in cloud: he sent forth his
lightnings and his thunders, and as he shook his aegis he gave victory
to the Trojans and routed the Achaeans.

The panic was begun by Peneleos the Boeotian, for while keeping his
face turned ever towards the foe he had been hit with a spear on the
upper part of the shoulder; a spear thrown by Polydamas had grazed the
top of the bone, for Polydamas had come up to him and struck him from
close at hand. Then Hector in close combat struck Leitus son of noble
Alectryon in the hand by the wrist, and disabled him from fighting
further. He looked about him in dismay, knowing that never again should
he wield spear in battle with the Trojans. While Hector was in pursuit
of Leitus, Idomeneus struck him on the breastplate over his chest near
the nipple; but the spear broke in the shaft, and the Trojans cheered
aloud. Hector then aimed at Idomeneus son of Deucalion as he was
standing on his chariot, and very narrowly missed him, but the spear
hit Coiranus, a follower and charioteer of Meriones who had come with
him from Lyctus. Idomeneus had left the ships on foot and would have
afforded a great triumph to the Trojans if Coiranus had not driven
quickly up to him, he therefore brought life and rescue to Idomeneus,
but himself fell by the hand of murderous Hector. For Hector hit him on
the jaw under the ear; the end of the spear drove out his teeth and cut
his tongue in two pieces, so that he fell from his chariot and let the
reins fall to the ground. Meriones gathered them up from the ground and
took them into his own hands, then he said to Idomeneus, "Lay on, till
you get back to the ships, for you must see that the day is no longer
ours."

On this Idomeneus lashed the horses to the ships, for fear had taken
hold upon him.

Ajax and Menelaus noted how Jove had turned the scale in favour of the
Trojans, and Ajax was first to speak. "Alas," said he, "even a fool may
see that father Jove is helping the Trojans. All their weapons strike
home; no matter whether it be a brave man or a coward that hurls them,
Jove speeds all alike, whereas ours fall each one of them without
effect. What, then, will be best both as regards rescuing the body, and
our return to the joy of our friends who will be grieving as they look
hitherwards; for they will make sure that nothing can now check the
terrible hands of Hector, and that he will fling himself upon our
ships. I wish that some one would go and tell the son of Peleus at
once, for I do not think he can have yet heard the sad news that the
dearest of his friends has fallen. But I can see not a man among the
Achaeans to send, for they and their chariots are alike hidden in
darkness. O father Jove, lift this cloud from over the sons of the
Achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will that we
perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight."

Father Jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears. Forthwith he
chased away the cloud of darkness, so that the sun shone out and all
the fighting was revealed. Ajax then said to Menelaus, "Look, Menelaus,
and if Antilochus son of Nestor be still living, send him at once to
tell Achilles that by far the dearest to him of all his comrades has
fallen."

Menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a
stockyard--the lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who keep
watch the whole night through and will not let him feast on the fat of
their herd. In his lust of meat he makes straight at them but in vain,
for darts from strong hands assail him, and burning brands which daunt
him for all his hunger, so in the morning he slinks sulkily away--even
so did Menelaus sorely against his will leave Patroclus, in great fear
lest the Achaeans should be driven back in rout and let him fall into
the hands of the foe. He charged Meriones and the two Ajaxes straitly
saying, "Ajaxes and Meriones, leaders of the Argives, now indeed
remember how good Patroclus was; he was ever courteous while alive,
bear it in mind now that he is dead."

With this Menelaus left them, looking round him as keenly as an eagle,
whose sight they say is keener than that of any other bird--however
high he may be in the heavens, not a hare that runs can escape him by
crouching under bush or thicket, for he will swoop down upon it and
make an end of it--even so, O Menelaus, did your keen eyes range round
the mighty host of your followers to see if you could find the son of
Nestor still alive. Presently Menelaus saw him on the extreme left of
the battle cheering on his men and exhorting them to fight boldly.
Menelaus went up to him and said, "Antilochus, come here and listen to
sad news, which I would indeed were untrue. You must see with your own
eyes that heaven is heaping calamity upon the Danaans, and giving
victory to the Trojans. Patroclus has fallen, who was the bravest of
the Achaeans, and sorely will the Danaans miss him. Run instantly to
the ships and tell Achilles, that he may come to rescue the body and
bear it to the ships. As for the armour, Hector already has it."

Antilochus was struck with horror. For a long time he was speechless;
his eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance, but he did
as Menelaus had said, and set off running as soon as he had given his
armour to a comrade, Laodocus, who was wheeling his horses round, close
beside him.

Thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad news to
Achilles son of Peleus. Nor were you, O Menelaus, minded to succour his
harassed comrades, when Antilochus had left the Pylians--and greatly
did they miss him--but he sent them noble Thrasymedes, and himself went
back to Patroclus. He came running up to the two Ajaxes and said, "I
have sent Antilochus to the ships to tell Achilles, but rage against
Hector as he may, he cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour.
What then will be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead, and
our own escape from death amid the battle-cries of the Trojans?"

Ajax answered, "Menelaus, you have said well: do you, then, and
Meriones stoop down, raise the body, and bear it out of the fray, while
we two behind you keep off Hector and the Trojans, one in heart as in
name, and long used to fighting side by side with one another."

On this Menelaus and Meriones took the dead man in their arms and
lifted him high aloft with a great effort. The Trojan host raised a hue
and cry behind them when they saw the Achaeans bearing the body away,
and flew after them like hounds attacking a wounded boar at the loo of
a band of young huntsmen. For a while the hounds fly at him as though
they would tear him in pieces, but now and again he turns on them in a
fury, scaring and scattering them in all directions--even so did the
Trojans for a while charge in a body, striking with sword and with
spears pointed at both the ends, but when the two Ajaxes faced them and
stood at bay, they would turn pale and no man dared press on to fight
further about the dead.

In this wise did the two heroes strain every nerve to bear the body to
the ships out of the fight. The battle raged round them like fierce
flames that when once kindled spread like wildfire over a city, and the
houses fall in the glare of its burning--even such was the roar and
tramp of men and horses that pursued them as they bore Patroclus from
the field. Or as mules that put forth all their strength to draw some
beam or great piece of ship's timber down a rough mountain-track, and
they pant and sweat as they go--even so did Menelaus and pant and sweat
as they bore the body of Patroclus. Behind them the two Ajaxes held
stoutly out. As some wooded mountain-spur that stretches across a plain
will turn water and check the flow even of a great river, nor is there
any stream strong enough to break through it--even so did the two
Ajaxes face the Trojans and stem the tide of their fighting though they
kept pouring on towards them and foremost among them all was Aeneas son
of Anchises with valiant Hector. As a flock of daws or starlings fall
to screaming and chattering when they see a falcon, foe to all small
birds, come soaring near them, even so did the Achaean youth raise a
babel of cries as they fled before Aeneas and Hector, unmindful of
their former prowess. In the rout of the Danaans much goodly armour
fell round about the trench, and of fighting there was no end.