BOOK XVI

  Fire being now thrown on the ship of Protesilaus, Patroclus
  fights in the armour of Achilles--He drives the Trojans back,
  but is in the end killed by Euphorbus and Hector.

THUS did they fight about the ship of Protesilaus. Then Patroclus drew
near to Achilles with tears welling from his eyes, as from some spring
whose crystal stream falls over the ledges of a high precipice. When
Achilles saw him thus weeping he was sorry for him and said, "Why,
Patroclus, do you stand there weeping like some silly child that comes
running to her mother, and begs to be taken up and carried--she catches
hold of her mother's dress to stay her though she is in a hurry, and
looks tearfully up until her mother carries her--even such tears,
Patroclus, are you now shedding. Have you anything to say to the
Myrmidons or to myself? or have you had news from Phthia which you
alone know? They tell me Menoetius son of Actor is still alive, as also
Peleus son of Aeacus, among the Myrmidons--men whose loss we two should
bitterly deplore; or are you grieving about the Argives and the way in
which they are being killed at the ships, through their own high-handed
doings? Do not hide anything from me but tell me that both of us may
know about it."

Then, O knight Patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered, "Achilles, son
of Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans, do not be angry, but I
weep for the disaster that has now befallen the Argives. All those who
have been their champions so far are lying at the ships, wounded by
sword or spear. Brave Diomed son of Tydeus has been hit with a spear,
while famed Ulysses and Agamemnon have received sword-wounds; Eurypylus
again has been struck with an arrow in the thigh; skilled apothecaries
are attending to these heroes, and healing them of their wounds; are
you still, O Achilles, so inexorable? May it never be my lot to nurse
such a passion as you have done, to the baning of your own good name.
Who in future story will speak well of you unless you now save the
Argives from ruin? You know no pity; knight Peleus was not your father
nor Thetis your mother, but the grey sea bore you and the sheer cliffs
begot you, so cruel and remorseless are you. If however you are kept
back through knowledge of some oracle, or if your mother Thetis has
told you something from the mouth of Jove, at least send me and the
Myrmidons with me, if I may bring deliverance to the Danaans. Let me
moreover wear your armour; the Trojans may thus mistake me for you and
quit the field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the Achaeans may have
breathing time--which while they are fighting may hardly be. We who are
fresh might soon drive tired men back from our ships and tents to their
own city."

He knew not what he was asking, nor that he was suing for his own
destruction. Achilles was deeply moved and answered, "What, noble
Patroclus, are you saying? I know no prophesyings which I am heeding,
nor has my mother told me anything from the mouth of Jove, but I am cut
to the very heart that one of my own rank should dare to rob me because
he is more powerful than I am. This, after all that I have gone
through, is more than I can endure. The girl whom the sons of the
Achaeans chose for me, whom I won as the fruit of my spear on having
sacked a city--her has King Agamemnon taken from me as though I were
some common vagrant. Still, let bygones be bygones: no man may keep his
anger for ever; I said I would not relent till battle and the cry of
war had reached my own ships; nevertheless, now gird my armour about
your shoulders, and lead the Myrmidons to battle, for the dark cloud of
Trojans has burst furiously over our fleet; the Argives are driven back
on to the beach, cooped within a narrow space, and the whole people of
Troy has taken heart to sally out against them, because they see not
the visor of my helmet gleaming near them. Had they seen this, there
would not have been a creek nor grip that had not been filled with
their dead as they fled back again. And so it would have been, if only
King Agamemnon had dealt fairly by me. As it is the Trojans have beset
our host. Diomed son of Tydeus no longer wields his spear to defend the
Danaans, neither have I heard the voice of the son of Atreus coming
from his hated head, whereas that of murderous Hector rings in my cars
as he gives orders to the Trojans, who triumph over the Achaeans and
fill the whole plain with their cry of battle. But even so, Patroclus,
fall upon them and save the fleet, lest the Trojans fire it and prevent
us from being able to return. Do, however, as I now bid you, that you
may win me great honour from all the Danaans, and that they may restore
the girl to me again and give me rich gifts into the bargain. When you
have driven the Trojans from the ships, come back again. Though Juno's
thundering husband should put triumph within your reach, do not fight
the Trojans further in my absence, or you will rob me of glory that
should be mine. And do not for lust of battle go on killing the Trojans
nor lead the Achaeans on to Ilius, lest one of the ever-living gods
from Olympus attack you--for Phoebus Apollo loves them well: return
when you have freed the ships from peril, and let others wage war upon
the plain. Would, by father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that not a
single man of all the Trojans might be left alive, nor yet of the
Argives, but that we two might be alone left to tear aside the mantle
that veils the brow of Troy."

Thus did they converse. But Ajax could no longer hold his ground for
the shower of darts that rained upon him; the will of Jove and the
javelins of the Trojans were too much for him; the helmet that gleamed
about his temples rang with the continuous clatter of the missiles that
kept pouring on to it and on to the cheek-pieces that protected his
face. Moreover his left shoulder was tired with having held his shield
so long, yet for all this, let fly at him as they would, they could not
make him give ground. He could hardly draw his breath, the sweat rained
from every pore of his body, he had not a moment's respite, and on all
sides he was beset by danger upon danger.

And now, tell me, O Muses that hold your mansions on Olympus, how fire
was thrown upon the ships of the Achaeans. Hector came close up and let
drive with his great sword at the ashen spear of Ajax. He cut it clean
in two just behind where the point was fastened on to the shaft of the
spear. Ajax, therefore, had now nothing but a headless spear, while the
bronze point flew some way off and came ringing down on to the ground.
Ajax knew the hand of heaven in this, and was dismayed at seeing that
Jove had now left him utterly defenceless and was willing victory for
the Trojans. Therefore he drew back, and the Trojans flung fire upon
the ship which was at once wrapped in flame.

The fire was now flaring about the ship's stern, whereon Achilles smote
his two thighs and said to Patroclus, "Up, noble knight, for I see the
glare of hostile fire at our fleet; up, lest they destroy our ships,
and there be no way by which we may retreat. Gird on your armour at
once while I call our people together."

As he spoke Patroclus put on his armour. First he greaved his legs with
greaves of good make, and fitted with ancle-clasps of silver; after
this he donned the cuirass of the son of Aeacus, richly inlaid and
studded. He hung his silver-studded sword of bronze about his
shoulders, and then his mighty shield. On his comely head he set his
helmet, well wrought, with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly
above it. He grasped two redoubtable spears that suited his hands, but
he did not take the spear of noble Achilles, so stout and strong, for
none other of the Achaeans could wield it, though Achilles could do so
easily. This was the ashen spear from Mount Pelion, which Chiron had
cut upon a mountain top and had given to Peleus, wherewith to deal out
death among heroes. He bade Automedon yoke his horses with all speed,
for he was the man whom he held in honour next after Achilles, and on
whose support in battle he could rely most firmly. Automedon therefore
yoked the fleet horses Xanthus and Balius, steeds that could fly like
the wind: these were they whom the harpy Podarge bore to the west wind,
as she was grazing in a meadow by the waters of the river Oceanus. In
the side traces he set the noble horse Pedasus, whom Achilles had
brought away with him when he sacked the city of Eetion, and who,
mortal steed though he was, could take his place along with those that
were immortal.

Meanwhile Achilles went about everywhere among the tents, and bade his
Myrmidons put on their armour. Even as fierce ravening wolves that are
feasting upon a homed stag which they have killed upon the mountains,
and their jaws are red with blood--they go in a pack to lap water from
the clear spring with their long thin tongues; and they reek of blood
and slaughter; they know not what fear is, for it is hunger drives
them--even so did the leaders and counsellors of the Myrmidons gather
round the good squire of the fleet descendant of Aeacus, and among them
stood Achilles himself cheering on both men and horses.

Fifty ships had noble Achilles brought to Troy, and in each there was a
crew of fifty oarsmen. Over these he set five captains whom he could
trust, while he was himself commander over them all. Menesthius of the
gleaming corslet, son to the river Spercheius that streams from heaven,
was captain of the first company. Fair Polydora daughter of Peleus bore
him to ever-flowing Spercheius--a woman mated with a god--but he was
called son of Borus son of Perieres, with whom his mother was living as
his wedded wife, and who gave great wealth to gain her. The second
company was led by noble Eudorus, son to an unwedded woman. Polymele,
daughter of Phylas the graceful dancer, bore him; the mighty slayer of
Argos was enamoured of her as he saw her among the singing women at a
dance held in honour of Diana the rushing huntress of the golden
arrows; he therefore--Mercury, giver of all good--went with her into an
upper chamber, and lay with her in secret, whereon she bore him a noble
son Eudorus, singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. When
Ilithuia goddess of the pains of child-birth brought him to the light
of day, and he saw the face of the sun, mighty Echecles son of Actor
took the mother to wife, and gave great wealth to gain her, but her
father Phylas brought the child up, and took care of him, doting as
fondly upon him as though he were his own son. The third company was
led by Pisander son of Maemalus, the finest spearman among all the
Myrmidons next to Achilles' own comrade Patroclus. The old knight
Phoenix was captain of the fourth company, and Alcimedon, noble son of
Laerceus of the fifth.

When Achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with their
captains, he charged them straitly saying, "Myrmidons, remember your
threats against the Trojans while you were at the ships in the time of
my anger, and you were all complaining of me. 'Cruel son of Peleus,'
you would say, 'your mother must have suckled you on gall, so ruthless
are you. You keep us here at the ships against our will; if you are so
relentless it were better we went home over the sea.' Often have you
gathered and thus chided with me. The hour is now come for those high
feats of arms that you have so long been pining for, therefore keep
high hearts each one of you to do battle with the Trojans."

With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they serried
their companies yet more closely when they heard the words of their
king. As the stones which a builder sets in the wall of some high house
which is to give shelter from the winds--even so closely were the
helmets and bossed shields set against one another. Shield pressed on
shield, helm on helm, and man on man; so close were they that the
horse-hair plumes on the gleaming ridges of their helmets touched each
other as they bent their heads.

In front of them all two men put on their armour--Patroclus and
Automedon--two men, with but one mind to lead the Myrmidons. Then
Achilles went inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong chest
which silver-footed Thetis had given him to take on board ship, and
which she had filled with shirts, cloaks to keep out the cold, and good
thick rugs. In this chest he had a cup of rare workmanship, from which
no man but himself might drink, nor would he make offering from it to
any other god save only to father Jove. He took the cup from the chest
and cleansed it with sulphur; this done he rinsed it clean water, and
after he had washed his hands he drew wine. Then he stood in the middle
of the court and prayed, looking towards heaven, and making his
drink-offering of wine; nor was he unseen of Jove whose joy is in
thunder. "King Jove," he cried, "lord of Dodona, god of the Pelasgi,
who dwellest afar, you who hold wintry Dodona in your sway, where your
prophets the Selli dwell around you with their feet unwashed and their
couches made upon the ground--if you heard me when I prayed to you
aforetime, and did me honour while you sent disaster on the Achaeans,
vouchsafe me now the fulfilment of yet this further prayer. I shall
stay here where my ships are lying, but I shall send my comrade into
battle at the head of many Myrmidons. Grant, O all-seeing Jove, that
victory may go with him; put your courage into his heart that Hector
may learn whether my squire is man enough to fight alone, or whether
his might is only then so indomitable when I myself enter the turmoil
of war. Afterwards when he has chased the fight and the cry of battle
from the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with his armour and
his comrades, fighters in close combat."

Thus did he pray, and all-counselling Jove heard his prayer. Part of it
he did indeed vouchsafe him--but not the whole. He granted that
Patroclus should thrust back war and battle from the ships, but refused
to let him come safely out of the fight.

When he had made his drink-offering and had thus prayed, Achilles went
inside his tent and put back the cup into his chest.

Then he again came out, for he still loved to look upon the fierce
fight that raged between the Trojans and Achaeans.

Meanwhile the armed band that was about Patroclus marched on till they
sprang high in hope upon the Trojans. They came swarming out like wasps
whose nests are by the roadside, and whom silly children love to tease,
whereon any one who happens to be passing may get stung--or again, if a
wayfarer going along the road vexes them by accident, every wasp will
come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones--even with such
rage and courage did the Myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their
cry of battle rose heavenwards. Patroclus called out to his men at the
top of his voice, "Myrmidons, followers of Achilles son of Peleus, be
men my friends, fight with might and with main, that we may win glory
for the son of Peleus, who is far the foremost man at the ships of the
Argives--he, and his close fighting followers. The son of Atreus King
Agamemnon will thus learn his folly in showing no respect to the
bravest of the Achaeans."

With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they fell in
a body upon the Trojans. The ships rang again with the cry which the
Achaeans raised, and when the Trojans saw the brave son of Menoetius
and his squire all gleaming in their armour, they were daunted and
their battalions were thrown into confusion, for they thought the fleet
son of Peleus must now have put aside his anger, and have been
reconciled to Agamemnon; every one, therefore, looked round about to
see whither he might fly for safety.

Patroclus first aimed a spear into the middle of the press where men
were packed most closely, by the stern of the ship of Protesilaus. He
hit Pyraechmes who had led his Paeonian horsemen from the Amydon and
the broad waters of the river Axius; the spear struck him on the right
shoulder, and with a groan he fell backwards in the dust; on this his
men were thrown into confusion, for by killing their leader, who was
the finest soldier among them, Patroclus struck panic into them all. He
thus drove them from the ship and quenched the fire that was then
blazing--leaving the half-burnt ship to lie where it was. The Trojans
were now driven back with a shout that rent the skies, while the
Danaans poured after them from their ships, shouting also without
ceasing. As when Jove, gatherer of the thunder-cloud, spreads a dense
canopy on the top of some lofty mountain, and all the peaks, the
jutting headlands, and forest glades show out in the great light that
flashes from the bursting heavens, even so when the Danaans had now
driven back the fire from their ships, they took breath for a little
while; but the fury of the fight was not yet over, for the Trojans were
not driven back in utter rout, but still gave battle, and were ousted
from their ground only by sheer fighting.

The fight then became more scattered, and the chieftains killed one
another when and how they could. The valiant son of Menoetius first
drove his spear into the thigh of Areilycus just as he was turning
round; the point went clean through, and broke the bone so that he fell
forward. Meanwhile Menelaus struck Thoas in the chest, where it was
exposed near the rim of his shield, and he fell dead. The son of
Phyleus saw Amphiclus about to attack him, and ere he could do so took
aim at the upper part of his thigh, where the muscles are thicker than
in any other part; the spear tore through all the sinews of the leg,
and his eyes were closed in darkness. Of the sons of Nestor one,
Antilochus, speared Atymnius, driving the point of the spear through
his throat, and down he fell. Maris then sprang on Antilochus in
hand-to-hand fight to avenge his brother, and bestrode the body spear
in hand; but valiant Thrasymedes was too quick for him, and in a moment
had struck him in the shoulder ere he could deal his blow; his aim was
true, and the spear severed all the muscles at the root of his arm, and
tore them right down to the bone, so he fell heavily to the ground and
his eyes were closed in darkness. Thus did these two noble comrades of
Sarpedon go down to Erebus slain by the two sons of Nestor; they were
the warrior sons of Amisodorus, who had reared the invincible Chimaera,
to the bane of many. Ajax son of Oileus sprang on Cleobulus and took
him alive as he was entangled in the crush; but he killed him then and
there by a sword-blow on the neck. The sword reeked with his blood,
while dark death and the strong hand of fate gripped him and closed his
eyes.

Peneleos and Lycon now met in close fight, for they had missed each
other with their spears. They had both thrown without effect, so now
they drew their swords. Lycon struck the plumed crest of Peneleos'
helmet but his sword broke at the hilt, while Peneleos smote Lycon on
the neck under the ear. The blade sank so deep that the head was held
on by nothing but the skin, and there was no more life left in him.
Meriones gave chase to Acamas on foot and caught him up just as he was
about to mount his chariot; he drove a spear through his right shoulder
so that he fell headlong from the car, and his eyes were closed in
darkness. Idomeneus speared Erymas in the mouth; the bronze point of
the spear went clean through it beneath the brain, crashing in among
the white bones and smashing them up. His teeth were all of them
knocked out and the blood came gushing in a stream from both his eyes;
it also came gurgling up from his mouth and nostrils, and the darkness
of death enfolded him round about.

Thus did these chieftains of the Danaans each of them kill his man. As
ravening wolves seize on kids or lambs, fastening on them when they are
alone on the hillsides and have strayed from the main flock through the
carelessness of the shepherd--and when the wolves see this they pounce
upon them at once because they cannot defend themselves--even so did
the Danaans now fall on the Trojans, who fled with ill-omened cries in
their panic and had no more fight left in them.

Meanwhile great Ajax kept on trying to drive a spear into Hector, but
Hector was so skilful that he held his broad shoulders well under cover
of his ox-hide shield, ever on the look-out for the whizzing of the
arrows and the heavy thud of the spears. He well knew that the fortunes
of the day had changed, but still stood his ground and tried to protect
his comrades.

As when a cloud goes up into heaven from Olympus, rising out of a clear
sky when Jove is brewing a gale--even with such panic stricken rout did
the Trojans now fly, and there was no order in their going. Hector's
fleet horses bore him and his armour out of the fight, and he left the
Trojan host penned in by the deep trench against their will. Many a
yoke of horses snapped the pole of their chariots in the trench and
left their master's car behind them. Patroclus gave chase, calling
impetuously on the Danaans and full of fury against the Trojans, who,
being now no longer in a body, filled all the ways with their cries of
panic and rout; the air was darkened with the clouds of dust they
raised, and the horses strained every nerve in their flight from the
tents and ships towards the city.

Patroclus kept on heading his horses wherever he saw most men flying in
confusion, cheering on his men the while. Chariots were being smashed
in all directions, and many a man came tumbling down from his own car
to fall beneath the wheels of that of Patroclus, whose immortal steeds,
given by the gods to Peleus, sprang over the trench at a bound as they
sped onward. He was intent on trying to get near Hector, for he had set
his heart on spearing him, but Hector's horses were now hurrying him
away. As the whole dark earth bows before some tempest on an autumn day
when Jove rains his hardest to punish men for giving crooked judgement
in their courts, and driving justice therefrom without heed to the
decrees of heaven--all the rivers run full and the torrents tear many a
new channel as they roar headlong from the mountains to the dark sea,
and it fares ill with the works of men--even such was the stress and
strain of the Trojan horses in their flight.

Patroclus now cut off the battalions that were nearest to him and drove
them back to the ships. They were doing their best to reach the city,
but he would not let them, and bore down on them between the river and
the ships and wall. Many a fallen comrade did he then avenge. First he
hit Pronous with a spear on the chest where it was exposed near the rim
of his shield, and he fell heavily to the ground. Next he sprang on
Thestor son of Enops, who was sitting all huddled up in his chariot,
for he had lost his head and the reins had been torn out of his hands.
Patroclus went up to him and drove a spear into his right jaw; he thus
hooked him by the teeth and the spear pulled him over the rim of his
car, as one who sits at the end of some jutting rock and draws a strong
fish out of the sea with a hook and a line--even so with his spear did
he pull Thestor all gaping from his chariot; he then threw him down on
his face and he died while falling. On this, as Erylaus was on coming
to attack him, he struck him full on the head with a stone, and his
brains were all battered inside his helmet, whereon he fell headlong to
the ground and the pangs of death took hold upon him. Then he laid low,
one after the other, Erymas, Amphoterus, Epaltes, Tlepolemus, Echius
son of Damastor, Pyris, Ipheus, Euippus and Polymelus son of Argeas.

Now when Sarpedon saw his comrades, men who wore ungirdled tunics,
being overcome by Patroclus son of Menoetius, he rebuked the Lycians
saying. "Shame on you, where are you flying to? Show your mettle; I
will myself meet this man in fight and learn who it is that is so
masterful; he has done us much hurt, and has stretched many a brave man
upon the ground."

He sprang from his chariot as he spoke, and Patroclus, when he saw
this, leaped on to the ground also. The two then rushed at one another
with loud cries like eagle-beaked crook-taloned vultures that scream
and tear at one another in some high mountain fastness.

The son of scheming Saturn looked down upon them in pity and said to
Juno who was his wife and sister, "Alas, that it should be the lot of
Sarpedon whom I love so dearly to perish by the hand of Patroclus. I am
in two minds whether to catch him up out of the fight and set him down
safe and sound in the fertile land of Lycia, or to let him now fall by
the hand of the son of Menoetius."

And Juno answered, "Most dread son of Saturn, what is this that you are
saying? Would you snatch a mortal man, whose doom has long been fated,
out of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we shall not all of us be
of your mind. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart, that if
you send Sarpedon safely to his own home, some other of the gods will
be also wanting to escort his son out of battle, for there are many
sons of gods fighting round the city of Troy, and you will make every
one jealous. If, however, you are fond of him and pity him, let him
indeed fall by the hand of Patroclus, but as soon as the life is gone
out of him, send Death and sweet Sleep to bear him off the field and
take him to the broad lands of Lycia, where his brothers and his
kinsmen will bury him with mound and pillar, in due honour to the dead."

The sire of gods and men assented, but he shed a rain of blood upon the
earth in honour of his son whom Patroclus was about to kill on the rich
plain of Troy far from his home.

When they were now come close to one another Patroclus struck
Thrasydemus, the brave squire of Sarpedon, in the lower part of the
belly, and killed him. Sarpedon then aimed a spear at Patroclus and
missed him, but he struck the horse Pedasus in the right shoulder, and
it screamed aloud as it lay, groaning in the dust until the life went
out of it. The other two horses began to plunge; the pole of the
chariot cracked and they got entangled in the reins through the fall of
the horse that was yoked along with them; but Automedon knew what to
do; without the loss of a moment he drew the keen blade that hung by
his sturdy thigh and cut the third horse adrift; whereon the other two
righted themselves, and pulling hard at the reins again went together
into battle.

Sarpedon now took a second aim at Patroclus, and again missed him, the
point of the spear passed over his left shoulder without hitting him.
Patroclus then aimed in his turn, and the spear sped not from his hand
in vain, for he hit Sarpedon just where the midriff surrounds the
ever-beating heart. He fell like some oak or silver poplar or tall pine
to which woodmen have laid their axes upon the mountains to make timber
for ship-building--even so did he lie stretched at full length in front
of his chariot and horses, moaning and clutching at the blood-stained
dust. As when a lion springs with a bound upon a herd of cattle and
fastens on a great black bull which dies bellowing in its
clutches--even so did the leader of the Lycian warriors struggle in
death as he fell by the hand of Patroclus. He called on his trusty
comrade and said, "Glaucus, my brother, hero among heroes, put forth
all your strength, fight with might and main, now if ever quit yourself
like a valiant soldier. First go about among the Lycian captains and
bid them fight for Sarpedon; then yourself also do battle to save my
armour from being taken. My name will haunt you henceforth and for ever
if the Achaeans rob me of my armour now that I have fallen at their
ships. Do your very utmost and call all my people together."

Death closed his eyes as he spoke. Patroclus planted his heel on his
breast and drew the spear from his body, whereon his senses came out
along with it, and he drew out both spear-point and Sarpedon's soul at
the same time. Hard by the Myrmidons held his snorting steeds, who were
wild with panic at finding themselves deserted by their lords.

Glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what Sarpedon said, for
he could not help him. He had to support his arm with his other hand,
being in great pain through the wound which Teucer's arrow had given
him when Teucer was defending the wall as he, Glaucus, was assailing
it. Therefore he prayed to far-darting Apollo saying, "Hear me O king
from your seat, may be in the rich land of Lycia, or may be in Troy,
for in all places you can hear the prayer of one who is in distress, as
I now am. I have a grievous wound; my hand is aching with pain, there
is no staunching the blood, and my whole arm drags by reason of my
hurt, so that I cannot grasp my sword nor go among my foes and fight
them, though our prince, Jove's son Sarpedon, is slain. Jove defended
not his son, do you, therefore, O king, heal me of my wound, ease my
pain and grant me strength both to cheer on the Lycians and to fight
along with them round the body of him who has fallen."

Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. He eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
Glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had
answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the Lycian
captains, and bade them come to fight about the body of Sarpedon. From
these he strode on among the Trojans to Polydamas son of Panthous and
Agenor; he then went in search of Aeneas and Hector, and when he had
found them he said, "Hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies,
who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them. Sarpedon leader of the Lycian warriors has
fallen--he who was at once the right and might of Lycia; Mars has laid
him low by the spear of Patroclus. Stand by him, my friends, and suffer
not the Myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat his body
with contumely in revenge for all the Danaans whom we have speared at
the ships."

As he spoke the Trojans were plunged in extreme and ungovernable grief;
for Sarpedon, alien though he was, had been one of the main stays of
their city, both as having much people with him, and himself the
foremost among them all. Led by Hector, who was infuriated by the fall
of Sarpedon, they made instantly for the Danaans with all their might,
while the undaunted spirit of Patroclus son of Menoetius cheered on the
Achaeans. First he spoke to the two Ajaxes, men who needed no bidding.
"Ajaxes," said he, "may it now please you to show yourselves the men
you have always been, or even better--Sarpedon is fallen--he who was
first to overleap the wall of the Achaeans; let us take the body and
outrage it; let us strip the armour from his shoulders, and kill his
comrades if they try to rescue his body."

He spoke to men who of themselves were full eager; both sides,
therefore, the Trojans and Lycians on the one hand, and the Myrmidons
and Achaeans on the other, strengthened their battalions, and fought
desperately about the body of Sarpedon, shouting fiercely the while.
Mighty was the din of their armour as they came together, and Jove shed
a thick darkness over the fight, to increase the toil of the battle
over the body of his son.

At first the Trojans made some headway against the Achaeans, for one of
the best men among the Myrmidons was killed, Epeigeus, son of noble
Agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of Budeum; but
presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge
with Peleus and Thetis, who sent him to Ilius the land of noble steeds
to fight the Trojans under Achilles. Hector now struck him on the head
with a stone just as he had caught hold of the body, and his brains
inside his helmet were all battered in, so that he fell face foremost
upon the body of Sarpedon, and there died. Patroclus was enraged by the
death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a
hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. Even so swiftly,
O noble knight Patroclus, did you make straight for the Lycians and
Trojans to avenge your comrade. Forthwith he struck Sthenelaus the son
of Ithaemenes on the neck with a stone, and broke the tendons that join
it to the head and spine. On this Hector and the front rank of his men
gave ground. As far as a man can throw a javelin when competing for
some prize, or even in battle--so far did the Trojans now retreat
before the Achaeans. Glaucus, captain of the Lycians, was the first to
rally them, by killing Bathycles son of Chalcon who lived in Hellas and
was the richest man among the Myrmidons. Glaucus turned round suddenly,
just as Bathycles who was pursuing him was about to lay hold of him,
and drove his spear right into the middle of his chest, whereon he fell
heavily to the ground, and the fall of so good a man filled the
Achaeans with dismay, while the Trojans were exultant, and came up in a
body round the corpse. Nevertheless the Achaeans, mindful of their
prowess, bore straight down upon them.

Meriones then killed a helmed warrior of the Trojans, Laogonus son of
Onetor, who was priest of Jove of Mt. Ida, and was honoured by the
people as though he were a god. Meriones struck him under the jaw and
ear, so that life went out of him and the darkness of death laid hold
upon him. Aeneas then aimed a spear at Meriones, hoping to hit him
under the shield as he was advancing, but Meriones saw it coming and
stooped forward to avoid it, whereon the spear flew past him and the
point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering till
Mars robbed it of its force. The spear, therefore, sped from Aeneas's
hand in vain and fell quivering to the ground. Aeneas was angry and
said, "Meriones, you are a good dancer, but if I had hit you my spear
would soon have made an end of you."

And Meriones answered, "Aeneas, for all your bravery, you will not be
able to make an end of every one who comes against you. You are only a
mortal like myself, and if I were to hit you in the middle of your
shield with my spear, however strong and self-confident you may be, I
should soon vanquish you, and you would yield your life to Hades of the
noble steeds."

On this the son of Menoetius rebuked him and said, "Meriones, hero
though you be, you should not speak thus; taunting speeches, my good
friend, will not make the Trojans draw away from the dead body; some of
them must go under ground first; blows for battle, and words for
council; fight, therefore, and say nothing."

He led the way as he spoke and the hero went forward with him. As the
sound of woodcutters in some forest glade upon the mountains--and the
thud of their axes is heard afar--even such a din now rose from
earth-clash of bronze armour and of good ox-hide shields, as men smote
each other with their swords and spears pointed at both ends. A man had
need of good eyesight now to know Sarpedon, so covered was he from head
to foot with spears and blood and dust. Men swarmed about the body, as
flies that buzz round the full milk-pails in spring when they are
brimming with milk--even so did they gather round Sarpedon; nor did
Jove turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept
looking at it all the time, for he was settling how best to kill
Patroclus, and considering whether Hector should be allowed to end him
now in the fight round the body of Sarpedon, and strip him of his
armour, or whether he should let him give yet further trouble to the
Trojans. In the end, he deemed it best that the brave squire of
Achilles son of Peleus should drive Hector and the Trojans back towards
the city and take the lives of many. First, therefore, he made Hector
turn fainthearted, whereon he mounted his chariot and fled, bidding the
other Trojans fly also, for he saw that the scales of Jove had turned
against him. Neither would the brave Lycians stand firm; they were
dismayed when they saw their king lying struck to the heart amid a heap
of corpses--for when the son of Saturn made the fight wax hot many had
fallen above him. The Achaeans, therefore stripped the gleaming armour
from his shoulders and the brave son of Menoetius gave it to his men to
take to the ships. Then Jove lord of the storm-cloud said to Apollo,
"Dear Phoebus, go, I pray you, and take Sarpedon out of range of the
weapons; cleanse the black blood from off him, and then bear him a long
way off where you may wash him in the river, anoint him with ambrosia,
and clothe him in immortal raiment; this done, commit him to the arms
of the two fleet messengers, Death, and Sleep, who will carry him
straightway to the rich land of Lycia, where his brothers and kinsmen
will inter him, and will raise both mound and pillar to his memory, in
due honour to the dead."

Thus he spoke. Apollo obeyed his father's saying, and came down from
the heights of Ida into the thick of the fight; forthwith he took
Sarpedon out of range of the weapons, and then bore him a long way off,
where he washed him in the river, anointed him with ambrosia and
clothed him in immortal raiment; this done, he committed him to the
arms of the two fleet messengers, Death, and Sleep, who presently set
him down in the rich land of Lycia.

Meanwhile Patroclus, with many a shout to his horses and to Automedon,
pursued the Trojans and Lycians in the pride and foolishness of his
heart. Had he but obeyed the bidding of the son of Peleus, he would
have escaped death and have been scatheless; but the counsels of Jove
pass man's understanding; he will put even a brave man to flight and
snatch victory from his grasp, or again he will set him on to fight, as
he now did when he put a high spirit into the heart of Patroclus.

Who then first, and who last, was slain by you, O Patroclus, when the
gods had now called you to meet your doom? First Adrestus, Autonous,
Echeclus, Perimus the son of Megas, Epistor and Melanippus; after these
he killed Elasus, Mulius, and Pylartes. These he slew, but the rest
saved themselves by flight.

The sons of the Achaeans would now have taken Troy by the hands of
Patroclus, for his spear flew in all directions, had not Phoebus Apollo
taken his stand upon the wall to defeat his purpose and to aid the
Trojans. Thrice did Patroclus charge at an angle of the high wall, and
thrice did Apollo beat him back, striking his shield with his own
immortal hands. When Patroclus was coming on like a god for yet a
fourth time, Apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said, "Draw
back, noble Patroclus, it is not your lot to sack the city of the
Trojan chieftains, nor yet will it be that of Achilles who is a far
better man than you are." On hearing this, Patroclus withdrew to some
distance and avoided the anger of Apollo.

Meanwhile Hector was waiting with his horses inside the Scaean gates,
in doubt whether to drive out again and go on fighting, or to call the
army inside the gates. As he was thus doubting Phoebus Apollo drew near
him in the likeness of a young and lusty warrior Asius, who was
Hector's uncle, being own brother to Hecuba, and son of Dymas who lived
in Phrygia by the waters of the river Sangarius; in his likeness Jove's
son Apollo now spoke to Hector saying, "Hector, why have you left off
fighting? It is ill done of you. If I were as much better a man than
you, as I am worse, you should soon rue your slackness. Drive straight
towards Patroclus, if so be that Apollo may grant you a triumph over
him, and you may rule him."

With this the god went back into the hurly-burly, and Hector bade
Cebriones drive again into the fight. Apollo passed in among them, and
struck panic into the Argives, while he gave triumph to Hector and the
Trojans. Hector let the other Danaans alone and killed no man, but
drove straight at Patroclus. Patroclus then sprang from his chariot to
the ground, with a spear in his left hand, and in his right a jagged
stone as large as his hand could hold. He stood still and threw it, nor
did it go far without hitting some one; the cast was not in vain, for
the stone struck Cebriones, Hector's charioteer, a bastard son of
Priam, as he held the reins in his hands. The stone hit him on the
forehead and drove his brows into his head for the bone was smashed,
and his eyes fell to the ground at his feet. He dropped dead from his
chariot as though he were diving, and there was no more life left in
him. Over him did you then vaunt, O knight Patroclus, saying, "Bless my
heart, how active he is, and how well he dives. If we had been at sea
this fellow would have dived from the ship's side and brought up as
many oysters as the whole crew could stomach, even in rough water, for
he has dived beautifully off his chariot on to the ground. It seems,
then, that there are divers also among the Trojans."

As he spoke he flung himself on Cebriones with the spring, as it were,
of a lion that while attacking a stockyard is himself struck in the
chest, and his courage is his own bane--even so furiously, O Patroclus,
did you then spring upon Cebriones. Hector sprang also from his chariot
to the ground. The pair then fought over the body of Cebriones. As two
lions fight fiercely on some high mountain over the body of a stag that
they have killed, even so did these two mighty warriors, Patroclus son
of Menoetius and brave Hector, hack and hew at one another over the
corpse of Cebriones. Hector would not let him go when he had once got
him by the head, while Patroclus kept fast hold of his feet, and a
fierce fight raged between the other Danaans and Trojans. As the east
and south wind buffet one another when they beat upon some dense forest
on the mountains--there is beech and ash and spreading cornel; the top
of the trees roar as they beat on one another, and one can hear the
boughs cracking and breaking--even so did the Trojans and Achaeans
spring upon one another and lay about each other, and neither side
would give way. Many a pointed spear fell to ground and many a winged
arrow sped from its bow-string about the body of Cebriones; many a
great stone, moreover, beat on many a shield as they fought around his
body, but there he lay in the whirling clouds of dust, all huge and
hugely, heedless of his driving now.

So long as the sun was still high in mid-heaven the weapons of either
side were alike deadly, and the people fell; but when he went down
towards the time when men loose their oxen, the Achaeans proved to be
beyond all forecast stronger, so that they drew Cebriones out of range
of the darts and tumult of the Trojans, and stripped the armour from
his shoulders. Then Patroclus sprang like Mars with fierce intent and a
terrific shout upon the Trojans, and thrice did he kill nine men; but
as he was coming on like a god for a time, then, O Patroclus, was the
hour of your end approaching, for Phoebus fought you in fell earnest.
Patroclus did not see him as he moved about in the crush, for he was
enshrouded in thick darkness, and the god struck him from behind on his
back and his broad shoulders with the flat of his hand, so that his
eyes turned dizzy. Phoebus Apollo beat the helmet from off his head,
and it rolled rattling off under the horses' feet, where its horse-hair
plumes were all begrimed with dust and blood. Never indeed had that
helmet fared so before, for it had served to protect the head and
comely forehead of the godlike hero Achilles. Now, however, Zeus
delivered it over to be worn by Hector. Nevertheless the end of Hector
also was near. The bronze-shod spear, so great and so strong, was
broken in the hand of Patroclus, while his shield that covered him from
head to foot fell to the ground as did also the band that held it, and
Apollo undid the fastenings of his corslet.

On this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he stood as
one dazed; whereon Euphorbus son of Panthous a Dardanian, the best
spearman of his time, as also the finest horseman and fleetest runner,
came behind him and struck him in the back with a spear, midway between
the shoulders. This man as soon as ever he had come up with his chariot
had dismounted twenty men, so proficient was he in all the arts of
war--he it was, O knight Patroclus, that first drove a weapon into you,
but he did not quite overpower you. Euphorbus then ran back into the
crowd, after drawing his ashen spear out of the wound; he would not
stand firm and wait for Patroclus, unarmed though he now was, to attack
him; but Patroclus unnerved, alike by the blow the god had given him
and by the spear-wound, drew back under cover of his men in fear for
his life. Hector on this, seeing him to be wounded and giving ground,
forced his way through the ranks, and when close up with him struck him
in the lower part of the belly with a spear, driving the bronze point
right through it, so that he fell heavily to the ground to the great
grief of the Achaeans. As when a lion has fought some fierce wild-boar
and worsted him--the two fight furiously upon the mountains over some
little fountain at which they would both drink, and the lion has beaten
the boar till he can hardly breathe--even so did Hector son of Priam
take the life of the brave son of Menoetius who had killed so many,
striking him from close at hand, and vaunting over him the while.
"Patroclus," said he, "you deemed that you should sack our city, rob
our Trojan women of their freedom, and carry them off in your ships to
your own country. Fool; Hector and his fleet horses were ever straining
their utmost to defend them. I am foremost of all the Trojan warriors
to stave the day of bondage from off them; as for you, vultures shall
devour you here. Poor wretch, Achilles with all his bravery availed you
nothing; and yet I ween when you left him he charged you straitly
saying, 'Come not back to the ships, knight Patroclus, till you have
rent the bloodstained shirt of murderous Hector about his body.' Thus I
ween did he charge you, and your fool's heart answered him 'yea' within
you."

Then, as the life ebbed out of you, you answered, O knight Patroclus:
"Hector, vaunt as you will, for Jove the son of Saturn and Apollo have
vouchsafed you victory; it is they who have vanquished me so easily,
and they who have stripped the armour from my shoulders; had twenty
such men as you attacked me, all of them would have fallen before my
spear. Fate and the son of Leto have overpowered me, and among mortal
men Euphorbus; you are yourself third only in the killing of me. I say
further, and lay my saying to your heart, you too shall live but for a
little season; death and the day of your doom are close upon you, and
they will lay you low by the hand of Achilles son of Aeacus."

When he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in death, his soul left
his body and flitted down to the house of Hades, mourning its sad fate
and bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its manhood. Dead though
he was, Hector still spoke to him saying, "Patroclus, why should you
thus foretell my doom? Who knows but Achilles, son of lovely Thetis,
may be smitten by my spear and die before me?"

As he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his foot
upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back. He then
went spear in hand after Automedon, squire of the fleet descendant of
Aeacus, for he longed to lay him low, but the immortal steeds which the
gods had given as a rich gift to Peleus bore him swiftly from the field.
