BOOK V

  The exploits of Diomed, who, though wounded by Pandarus,
  continues fighting--He kills Pandarus and wounds AEneas--Venus
  rescues AEneas, but being wounded by Diomed, commits him
  to the care of Apollo and goes to Olympus, where she is tended
  by her mother Dione--Mars encourages the Trojans, and
  AEneas returns to the fight cured of his wound--Minerva and
  Juno help the Achaeans, and by the advice of the former
  Diomed wounds Mars, who returns to Olympus to get cured.

Then Pallas Minerva put valour into the heart of Diomed, son of Tydeus,
that he might excel all the other Argives, and cover himself with
glory. She made a stream of fire flare from his shield and helmet like
the star that shines most brilliantly in summer after its bath in the
waters of Oceanus--even such a fire did she kindle upon his head and
shoulders as she bade him speed into the thickest hurly-burly of the
fight.

Now there was a certain rich and honourable man among the Trojans,
priest of Vulcan, and his name was Dares. He had two sons, Phegeus and
Idaeus, both of them skilled in all the arts of war. These two came
forward from the main body of Trojans, and set upon Diomed, he being on
foot, while they fought from their chariot. When they were close up to
one another, Phegeus took aim first, but his spear went over Diomed's
left shoulder without hitting him. Diomed then threw, and his spear
sped not in vain, for it hit Phegeus on the breast near the nipple, and
he fell from his chariot. Idaeus did not dare to bestride his brother's
body, but sprang from the chariot and took to flight, or he would have
shared his brother's fate; whereon Vulcan saved him by wrapping him in
a cloud of darkness, that his old father might not be utterly
overwhelmed with grief; but the son of Tydeus drove off with the
horses, and bade his followers take them to the ships. The Trojans were
scared when they saw the two sons of Dares, one of them in fright and
the other lying dead by his chariot. Minerva, therefore, took Mars by
the hand and said, "Mars, Mars, bane of men, bloodstained stormer of
cities, may we not now leave the Trojans and Achaeans to fight it out,
and see to which of the two Jove will vouchsafe the victory? Let us go
away, and thus avoid his anger."

So saying, she drew Mars out of the battle, and set him down upon the
steep banks of the Scamander. Upon this the Danaans drove the Trojans
back, and each one of their chieftains killed his man. First King
Agamemnon flung mighty Odius, captain of the Halizoni, from his
chariot. The spear of Agamemnon caught him on the broad of his back,
just as he was turning in flight; it struck him between the shoulders
and went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground.

Then Idomeneus killed Phaesus, son of Borus the Meonian, who had come
from Varne. Mighty Idomeneus speared him on the right shoulder as he
was mounting his chariot, and the darkness of death enshrouded him as
he fell heavily from the car.

The squires of Idomeneus spoiled him of his armour, while Menelaus, son
of Atreus, killed Scamandrius the son of Strophius, a mighty huntsman
and keen lover of the chase. Diana herself had taught him how to kill
every kind of wild creature that is bred in mountain forests, but
neither she nor his famed skill in archery could now save him, for the
spear of Menelaus struck him in the back as he was flying; it struck
him between the shoulders and went right through his chest, so that he
fell headlong and his armour rang rattling round him.

Meriones then killed Phereclus the son of Tecton, who was the son of
Hermon, a man whose hand was skilled in all manner of cunning
workmanship, for Pallas Minerva had dearly loved him. He it was that
made the ships for Alexandrus, which were the beginning of all
mischief, and brought evil alike both on the Trojans and on Alexandrus
himself; for he heeded not the decrees of heaven. Meriones overtook him
as he was flying, and struck him on the right buttock. The point of the
spear went through the bone into the bladder, and death came upon him
as he cried aloud and fell forward on his knees.

Meges, moreover, slew Pedaeus, son of Antenor, who, though he was a
bastard, had been brought up by Theano as one of her own children, for
the love she bore her husband. The son of Phyleus got close up to him
and drove a spear into the nape of his neck: it went under his tongue
all among his teeth, so he bit the cold bronze, and fell dead in the
dust.

And Eurypylus, son of Euaemon, killed Hypsenor, the son of noble
Dolopion, who had been made priest of the river Scamander, and was
honoured among the people as though he were a god. Eurypylus gave him
chase as he was flying before him, smote him with his sword upon the
arm, and lopped his strong hand from off it. The bloody hand fell to
the ground, and the shades of death, with fate that no man can
withstand, came over his eyes.

Thus furiously did the battle rage between them. As for the son of
Tydeus, you could not say whether he was more among the Achaeans or the
Trojans. He rushed across the plain like a winter torrent that has
burst its barrier in full flood; no dykes, no walls of fruitful
vineyards can embank it when it is swollen with rain from heaven, but
in a moment it comes tearing onward, and lays many a field waste that
many a strong man's hand has reclaimed--even so were the dense
phalanxes of the Trojans driven in rout by the son of Tydeus, and many
though they were, they dared not abide his onslaught.

Now when the son of Lycaon saw him scouring the plain and driving the
Trojans pell-mell before him, he aimed an arrow and hit the front part
of his cuirass near the shoulder: the arrow went right through the
metal and pierced the flesh, so that the cuirass was covered with
blood. On this the son of Lycaon shouted in triumph, "Knights Trojans,
come on; the bravest of the Achaeans is wounded, and he will not hold
out much longer if King Apollo was indeed with me when I sped from
Lycia hither."

Thus did he vaunt; but his arrow had not killed Diomed, who withdrew
and made for the chariot and horses of Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus.
"Dear son of Capaneus," said he, "come down from your chariot, and draw
the arrow out of my shoulder."

Sthenelus sprang from his chariot, and drew the arrow from the wound,
whereon the blood came spouting out through the hole that had been made
in his shirt. Then Diomed prayed, saying, "Hear me, daughter of
aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, if ever you loved my father well and
stood by him in the thick of a fight, do the like now by me; grant me
to come within a spear's throw of that man and kill him. He has been
too quick for me and has wounded me; and now he is boasting that I
shall not see the light of the sun much longer."

Thus he prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard him; she made his limbs supple
and quickened his hands and his feet. Then she went up close to him and
said, "Fear not, Diomed, to do battle with the Trojans, for I have set
in your heart the spirit of your knightly father Tydeus. Moreover, I
have withdrawn the veil from your eyes, that you know gods and men
apart. If, then, any other god comes here and offers you battle, do not
fight him; but should Jove's daughter Venus come, strike her with your
spear and wound her."

When she had said this Minerva went away, and the son of Tydeus again
took his place among the foremost fighters, three times more fierce
even than he had been before. He was like a lion that some mountain
shepherd has wounded, but not killed, as he is springing over the wall
of a sheep-yard to attack the sheep. The shepherd has roused the brute
to fury but cannot defend his flock, so he takes shelter under cover of
the buildings, while the sheep, panic-stricken on being deserted, are
smothered in heaps one on top of the other, and the angry lion leaps
out over the sheep-yard wall. Even thus did Diomed go furiously about
among the Trojans.

He killed Astynous, and Hypeiron shepherd of his people, the one with a
thrust of his spear, which struck him above the nipple, the other with
a sword-cut on the collar-bone, that severed his shoulder from his neck
and back. He let both of them lie, and went in pursuit of Abas and
Polyidus, sons of the old reader of dreams Eurydamas: they never came
back for him to read them any more dreams, for mighty Diomed made an
end of them. He then gave chase to Xanthus and Thoon, the two sons of
Phaenops, both of them very dear to him, for he was now worn out with
age, and begat no more sons to inherit his possessions. But Diomed took
both their lives and left their father sorrowing bitterly, for he
nevermore saw them come home from battle alive, and his kinsmen divided
his wealth among themselves.

Then he came upon two sons of Priam, Echemmon and Chromius, as they
were both in one chariot. He sprang upon them as a lion fastens on the
neck of some cow or heifer when the herd is feeding in a coppice. For
all their vain struggles he flung them both from their chariot and
stripped the armour from their bodies. Then he gave their horses to his
comrades to take them back to the ships.

When Aeneas saw him thus making havoc among the ranks, he went through
the fight amid the rain of spears to see if he could find Pandarus.
When he had found the brave son of Lycaon he said, "Pandarus, where is
now your bow, your winged arrows, and your renown as an archer, in
respect of which no man here can rival you nor is there any in Lycia
that can beat you? Lift then your hands to Jove and send an arrow at
this fellow who is going so masterfully about, and has done such deadly
work among the Trojans. He has killed many a brave man--unless indeed
he is some god who is angry with the Trojans about their sacrifices,
and and has set his hand against them in his displeasure."

And the son of Lycaon answered, "Aeneas, I take him for none other than
the son of Tydeus. I know him by his shield, the visor of his helmet,
and by his horses. It is possible that he may be a god, but if he is
the man I say he is, he is not making all this havoc without heaven's
help, but has some god by his side who is shrouded in a cloud of
darkness, and who turned my arrow aside when it had hit him. I have
taken aim at him already and hit him on the right shoulder; my arrow
went through the breastpiece of his cuirass; and I made sure I should
send him hurrying to the world below, but it seems that I have not
killed him. There must be a god who is angry with me. Moreover I have
neither horse nor chariot. In my father's stables there are eleven
excellent chariots, fresh from the builder, quite new, with cloths
spread over them; and by each of them there stand a pair of horses,
champing barley and rye; my old father Lycaon urged me again and again
when I was at home and on the point of starting, to take chariots and
horses with me that I might lead the Trojans in battle, but I would not
listen to him; it would have been much better if I had done so, but I
was thinking about the horses, which had been used to eat their fill,
and I was afraid that in such a great gathering of men they might be
ill-fed, so I left them at home and came on foot to Ilius armed only
with my bow and arrows. These it seems, are of no use, for I have
already hit two chieftains, the sons of Atreus and of Tydeus, and
though I drew blood surely enough, I have only made them still more
furious. I did ill to take my bow down from its peg on the day I led my
band of Trojans to Ilius in Hector's service, and if ever I get home
again to set eyes on my native place, my wife, and the greatness of my
house, may some one cut my head off then and there if I do not break
the bow and set it on a hot fire--such pranks as it plays me."

Aeneas answered, "Say no more. Things will not mend till we two go
against this man with chariot and horses and bring him to a trial of
arms. Mount my chariot, and note how cleverly the horses of Tros can
speed hither and thither over the plain in pursuit or flight. If Jove
again vouchsafes glory to the son of Tydeus they will carry us safely
back to the city. Take hold, then, of the whip and reins while I stand
upon the car to fight, or else do you wait this man's onset while I
look after the horses."

"Aeneas," replied the son of Lycaon, "take the reins and drive; if we
have to fly before the son of Tydeus the horses will go better for
their own driver. If they miss the sound of your voice when they expect
it they may be frightened, and refuse to take us out of the fight. The
son of Tydeus will then kill both of us and take the horses. Therefore
drive them yourself and I will be ready for him with my spear."

They then mounted the chariot and drove full-speed towards the son of
Tydeus. Sthenelus, son of Capaneus, saw them coming and said to Diomed,
"Diomed, son of Tydeus, man after my own heart, I see two heroes
speeding towards you, both of them men of might the one a skilful
archer, Pandarus son of Lycaon, the other, Aeneas, whose sire is
Anchises, while his mother is Venus. Mount the chariot and let us
retreat. Do not, I pray you, press so furiously forward, or you may get
killed."

Diomed looked angrily at him and answered: "Talk not of flight, for I
shall not listen to you: I am of a race that knows neither flight nor
fear, and my limbs are as yet unwearied. I am in no mind to mount, but
will go against them even as I am; Pallas Minerva bids me be afraid of
no man, and even though one of them escape, their steeds shall not take
both back again. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart--if
Minerva sees fit to vouchsafe me the glory of killing both, stay your
horses here and make the reins fast to the rim of the chariot; then be
sure you spring Aeneas' horses and drive them from the Trojan to the
Achaean ranks. They are of the stock that great Jove gave to Tros in
payment for his son Ganymede, and are the finest that live and move
under the sun. King Anchises stole the blood by putting his mares to
them without Laomedon's knowledge, and they bore him six foals. Four
are still in his stables, but he gave the other two to Aeneas. We shall
win great glory if we can take them."

Thus did they converse, but the other two had now driven close up to
them, and the son of Lycaon spoke first. "Great and mighty son," said
he, "of noble Tydeus, my arrow failed to lay you low, so I will now try
with my spear."

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it from him. It struck the
shield of the son of Tydeus; the bronze point pierced it and passed on
till it reached the breastplate. Thereon the son of Lycaon shouted out
and said, "You are hit clean through the belly; you will not stand out
for long, and the glory of the fight is mine."

But Diomed all undismayed made answer, "You have missed, not hit, and
before you two see the end of this matter one or other of you shall
glut tough-shielded Mars with his blood."

With this he hurled his spear, and Minerva guided it on to Pandarus's
nose near the eye. It went crashing in among his white teeth; the
bronze point cut through the root of his tongue, coming out under his
chin, and his glistening armour rang rattling round him as he fell
heavily to the ground. The horses started aside for fear, and he was
reft of life and strength.

Aeneas sprang from his chariot armed with shield and spear, fearing
lest the Achaeans should carry off the body. He bestrode it as a lion
in the pride of strength, with shield and spear before him and a cry of
battle on his lips resolute to kill the first that should dare face
him. But the son of Tydeus caught up a mighty stone, so huge and great
that as men now are it would take two to lift it; nevertheless he bore
it aloft with ease unaided, and with this he struck Aeneas on the groin
where the hip turns in the joint that is called the "cup-bone." The
stone crushed this joint, and broke both the sinews, while its jagged
edges tore away all the flesh. The hero fell on his knees, and propped
himself with his hand resting on the ground till the darkness of night
fell upon his eyes. And now Aeneas, king of men, would have perished
then and there, had not his mother, Jove's daughter Venus, who had
conceived him by Anchises when he was herding cattle, been quick to
mark, and thrown her two white arms about the body of her dear son. She
protected him by covering him with a fold of her own fair garment, lest
some Danaan should drive a spear into his breast and kill him.

Thus, then, did she bear her dear son out of the fight. But the son of
Capaneus was not unmindful of the orders that Diomed had given him. He
made his own horses fast, away from the hurly-burly, by binding the
reins to the rim of the chariot. Then he sprang upon Aeneas's horses
and drove them from the Trojan to the Achaean ranks. When he had so
done he gave them over to his chosen comrade Deipylus, whom he valued
above all others as the one who was most like-minded with himself, to
take them on to the ships. He then remounted his own chariot, seized
the reins, and drove with all speed in search of the son of Tydeus.

Now the son of Tydeus was in pursuit of the Cyprian goddess, spear in
hand, for he knew her to be feeble and not one of those goddesses that
can lord it among men in battle like Minerva or Enyo the waster of
cities, and when at last after a long chase he caught her up, he flew
at her and thrust his spear into the flesh of her delicate hand. The
point tore through the ambrosial robe which the Graces had woven for
her, and pierced the skin between her wrist and the palm of her hand,
so that the immortal blood, or ichor, that flows in the veins of the
blessed gods, came pouring from the wound; for the gods do not eat
bread nor drink wine, hence they have no blood such as ours, and are
immortal. Venus screamed aloud, and let her son fall, but Phoebus
Apollo caught him in his arms, and hid him in a cloud of darkness, lest
some Danaan should drive a spear into his breast and kill him; and
Diomed shouted out as he left her, "Daughter of Jove, leave war and
battle alone, can you not be contented with beguiling silly women? If
you meddle with fighting you will get what will make you shudder at the
very name of war."

The goddess went dazed and discomfited away, and Iris, fleet as the
wind, drew her from the throng, in pain and with her fair skin all
besmirched. She found fierce Mars waiting on the left of the battle,
with his spear and his two fleet steeds resting on a cloud; whereon she
fell on her knees before her brother and implored him to let her have
his horses. "Dear brother," she cried, "save me, and give me your
horses to take me to Olympus where the gods dwell. I am badly wounded
by a mortal, the son of Tydeus, who would now fight even with father
Jove."

Thus she spoke, and Mars gave her his gold-bedizened steeds. She
mounted the chariot sick and sorry at heart, while Iris sat beside her
and took the reins in her hand. She lashed her horses on and they flew
forward nothing loth, till in a trice they were at high Olympus, where
the gods have their dwelling. There she stayed them, unloosed them from
the chariot, and gave them their ambrosial forage; but Venus flung
herself on to the lap of her mother Dione, who threw her arms about her
and caressed her, saying, "Which of the heavenly beings has been
treating you in this way, as though you had been doing something wrong
in the face of day?"

And laughter-loving Venus answered, "Proud Diomed, the son of Tydeus,
wounded me because I was bearing my dear son Aeneas, whom I love best
of all mankind, out of the fight. The war is no longer one between
Trojans and Achaeans, for the Danaans have now taken to fighting with
the immortals."

"Bear it, my child," replied Dione, "and make the best of it. We
dwellers in Olympus have to put up with much at the hands of men, and
we lay much suffering on one another. Mars had to suffer when Otus and
Ephialtes, children of Aloeus, bound him in cruel bonds, so that he lay
thirteen months imprisoned in a vessel of bronze. Mars would have then
perished had not fair Eeriboea, stepmother to the sons of Aloeus, told
Mercury, who stole him away when he was already well-nigh worn out by
the severity of his bondage. Juno, again, suffered when the mighty son
of Amphitryon wounded her on the right breast with a three-barbed
arrow, and nothing could assuage her pain. So, also, did huge Hades,
when this same man, the son of aegis-bearing Jove, hit him with an
arrow even at the gates of hell, and hurt him badly. Thereon Hades went
to the house of Jove on great Olympus, angry and full of pain; and the
arrow in his brawny shoulder caused him great anguish till Paeeon
healed him by spreading soothing herbs on the wound, for Hades was not
of mortal mould. Daring, head-strong, evildoer who recked not of his
sin in shooting the gods that dwell in Olympus. And now Minerva has
egged this son of Tydeus on against yourself, fool that he is for not
reflecting that no man who fights with gods will live long or hear his
children prattling about his knees when he returns from battle. Let,
then, the son of Tydeus see that he does not have to fight with one who
is stronger than you are. Then shall his brave wife Aegialeia, daughter
of Adrestus, rouse her whole house from sleep, wailing for the loss of
her wedded lord, Diomed the bravest of the Achaeans."

So saying, she wiped the ichor from the wrist of her daughter with both
hands, whereon the pain left her, and her hand was healed. But Minerva
and Juno, who were looking on, began to taunt Jove with their mocking
talk, and Minerva was first to speak. "Father Jove," said she, "do not
be angry with me, but I think the Cyprian must have been persuading
some one of the Achaean women to go with the Trojans of whom she is so
very fond, and while caressing one or other of them she must have torn
her delicate hand with the gold pin of the woman's brooch."

The sire of gods and men smiled, and called golden Venus to his side.
"My child," said he, "it has not been given you to be a warrior.
Attend, henceforth, to your own delightful matrimonial duties, and
leave all this fighting to Mars and to Minerva."

Thus did they converse. But Diomed sprang upon Aeneas, though he knew
him to be in the very arms of Apollo. Not one whit did he fear the
mighty god, so set was he on killing Aeneas and stripping him of his
armour. Thrice did he spring forward with might and main to slay him,
and thrice did Apollo beat back his gleaming shield. When he was coming
on for the fourth time, as though he were a god, Apollo shouted to him
with an awful voice and said, "Take heed, son of Tydeus, and draw off;
think not to match yourself against gods, for men that walk the earth
cannot hold their own with the immortals."

The son of Tydeus then gave way for a little space, to avoid the anger
of the god, while Apollo took Aeneas out of the crowd and set him in
sacred Pergamus, where his temple stood. There, within the mighty
sanctuary, Latona and Diana healed him and made him glorious to behold,
while Apollo of the silver bow fashioned a wraith in the likeness of
Aeneas, and armed as he was. Round this the Trojans and Achaeans hacked
at the bucklers about one another's breasts, hewing each other's round
shields and light hide-covered targets. Then Phoebus Apollo said to
Mars, "Mars, Mars, bane of men, blood-stained stormer of cities, can
you not go to this man, the son of Tydeus, who would now fight even
with father Jove, and draw him out of the battle? He first went up to
the Cyprian and wounded her in the hand near her wrist, and afterwards
sprang upon me too, as though he were a god."

He then took his seat on the top of Pergamus, while murderous Mars went
about among the ranks of the Trojans, cheering them on, in the likeness
of fleet Acamas chief of the Thracians. "Sons of Priam," said he, "how
long will you let your people be thus slaughtered by the Achaeans?
Would you wait till they are at the walls of Troy? Aeneas the son of
Anchises has fallen, he whom we held in as high honour as Hector
himself. Help me, then, to rescue our brave comrade from the stress of
the fight."

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Then Sarpedon
rebuked Hector very sternly. "Hector," said he, "where is your prowess
now? You used to say that though you had neither people nor allies you
could hold the town alone with your brothers and brothers-in-law. I see
not one of them here; they cower as hounds before a lion; it is we,
your allies, who bear the brunt of the battle. I have come from afar,
even from Lycia and the banks of the river Xanthus, where I have left
my wife, my infant son, and much wealth to tempt whoever is needy;
nevertheless, I head my Lycian soldiers and stand my ground against any
who would fight me though I have nothing here for the Achaeans to
plunder, while you look on, without even bidding your men stand firm in
defence of their wives. See that you fall not into the hands of your
foes as men caught in the meshes of a net, and they sack your fair city
forthwith. Keep this before your mind night and day, and beseech the
captains of your allies to hold on without flinching, and thus put away
their reproaches from you."

So spoke Sarpedon, and Hector smarted under his words. He sprang from
his chariot clad in his suit of armour, and went about among the host
brandishing his two spears, exhorting the men to fight and raising the
terrible cry of battle. Then they rallied and again faced the Achaeans,
but the Argives stood compact and firm, and were not driven back. As
the breezes sport with the chaff upon some goodly threshing-floor, when
men are winnowing--while yellow Ceres blows with the wind to sift the
chaff from the grain, and the chaff-heaps grow whiter and whiter--even
so did the Achaeans whiten in the dust which the horses' hoofs raised
to the firmament of heaven, as their drivers turned them back to
battle, and they bore down with might upon the foe. Fierce Mars, to
help the Trojans, covered them in a veil of darkness, and went about
everywhere among them, inasmuch as Phoebus Apollo had told him that
when he saw Pallas Minerva leave the fray he was to put courage into
the hearts of the Trojans--for it was she who was helping the Danaans.
Then Apollo sent Aeneas forth from his rich sanctuary, and filled his
heart with valour, whereon he took his place among his comrades, who
were overjoyed at seeing him alive, sound, and of a good courage; but
they could not ask him how it had all happened, for they were too busy
with the turmoil raised by Mars and by Strife, who raged insatiably in
their midst.

The two Ajaxes, Ulysses and Diomed, cheered the Danaans on, fearless of
the fury and onset of the Trojans. They stood as still as clouds which
the son of Saturn has spread upon the mountain tops when there is no
air and fierce Boreas sleeps with the other boisterous winds whose
shrill blasts scatter the clouds in all directions--even so did the
Danaans stand firm and unflinching against the Trojans. The son of
Atreus went about among them and exhorted them. "My friends," said he,
"quit yourselves like brave men, and shun dishonour in one another's
eyes amid the stress of battle. They that shun dishonour more often
live than get killed, but they that fly save neither life nor name."

As he spoke he hurled his spear and hit one of those who were in the
front rank, the comrade of Aeneas, Deicoon son of Pergasus, whom the
Trojans held in no less honour than the sons of Priam, for he was ever
quick to place himself among the foremost. The spear of King Agamemnon
struck his shield and went right through it, for the shield stayed it
not. It drove through his belt into the lower part of his belly, and
his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.

Then Aeneas killed two champions of the Danaans, Crethon and
Orsilochus. Their father was a rich man who lived in the strong city of
Phere and was descended from the river Alpheus, whose broad stream
flows through the land of the Pylians. The river begat Orsilochus, who
ruled over much people and was father to Diocles, who in his turn begat
twin sons, Crethon and Orsilochus, well skilled in all the arts of war.
These, when they grew up, went to Ilius with the Argive fleet in the
cause of Menelaus and Agamemnon sons of Atreus, and there they both of
them fell. As two lions whom their dam has reared in the depths of some
mountain forest to plunder homesteads and carry off sheep and cattle
till they get killed by the hand of man, so were these two vanquished
by Aeneas, and fell like high pine-trees to the ground.

Brave Menelaus pitied them in their fall, and made his way to the
front, clad in gleaming bronze and brandishing his spear, for Mars
egged him on to do so with intent that he should be killed by Aeneas;
but Antilochus the son of Nestor saw him and sprang forward, fearing
that the king might come to harm and thus bring all their labour to
nothing; when, therefore Aeneas and Menelaus were setting their hands
and spears against one another eager to do battle, Antilochus placed
himself by the side of Menelaus. Aeneas, bold though he was, drew back
on seeing the two heroes side by side in front of him, so they drew the
bodies of Crethon and Orsilochus to the ranks of the Achaeans and
committed the two poor fellows into the hands of their comrades. They
then turned back and fought in the front ranks.

They killed Pylaemenes peer of Mars, leader of the Paphlagonian
warriors. Menelaus struck him on the collar-bone as he was standing on
his chariot, while Antilochus hit his charioteer and squire Mydon, the
son of Atymnius, who was turning his horses in flight. He hit him with
a stone upon the elbow, and the reins, enriched with white ivory, fell
from his hands into the dust. Antilochus rushed towards him and struck
him on the temples with his sword, whereon he fell head first from the
chariot to the ground. There he stood for a while with his head and
shoulders buried deep in the dust--for he had fallen on sandy soil till
his horses kicked him and laid him flat on the ground, as Antilochus
lashed them and drove them off to the host of the Achaeans.

But Hector marked them from across the ranks, and with a loud cry
rushed towards them, followed by the strong battalions of the Trojans.
Mars and dread Enyo led them on, she fraught with ruthless turmoil of
battle, while Mars wielded a monstrous spear, and went about, now in
front of Hector and now behind him.

Diomed shook with passion as he saw them. As a man crossing a wide
plain is dismayed to find himself on the brink of some great river
rolling swiftly to the sea--he sees its boiling waters and starts back
in fear--even so did the son of Tydeus give ground. Then he said to his
men, "My friends, how can we wonder that Hector wields the spear so
well? Some god is ever by his side to protect him, and now Mars is with
him in the likeness of mortal man. Keep your faces therefore towards
the Trojans, but give ground backwards, for we dare not fight with
gods."

As he spoke the Trojans drew close up, and Hector killed two men, both
in one chariot, Menesthes and Anchialus, heroes well versed in war.
Ajax son of Telamon pitied them in their fall; he came close up and
hurled his spear, hitting Amphius the son of Selagus, a man of great
wealth who lived in Paesus and owned much corn-growing land, but his
lot had led him to come to the aid of Priam and his sons. Ajax struck
him in the belt; the spear pierced the lower part of his belly, and he
fell heavily to the ground. Then Ajax ran towards him to strip him of
his armour, but the Trojans rained spears upon him, many of which fell
upon his shield. He planted his heel upon the body and drew out his
spear, but the darts pressed so heavily upon him that he could not
strip the goodly armour from his shoulders. The Trojan chieftains,
moreover, many and valiant, came about him with their spears, so that
he dared not stay; great, brave and valiant though he was, they drove
him from them and he was beaten back.

Thus, then, did the battle rage between them. Presently the strong hand
of fate impelled Tlepolemus, the son of Hercules, a man both brave and
of great stature, to fight Sarpedon; so the two, son and grandson of
great Jove, drew near to one another, and Tlepolemus spoke first.
"Sarpedon," said he, "councillor of the Lycians, why should you come
skulking here you who are a man of peace? They lie who call you son of
aegis-bearing Jove, for you are little like those who were of old his
children. Far other was Hercules, my own brave and lion-hearted father,
who came here for the horses of Laomedon, and though he had six ships
only, and few men to follow him, sacked the city of Ilius and made a
wilderness of her highways. You are a coward, and your people are
falling from you. For all your strength, and all your coming from
Lycia, you will be no help to the Trojans but will pass the gates of
Hades vanquished by my hand."

And Sarpedon, captain of the Lycians, answered, "Tlepolemus, your
father overthrew Ilius by reason of Laomedon's folly in refusing
payment to one who had served him well. He would not give your father
the horses which he had come so far to fetch. As for yourself, you
shall meet death by my spear. You shall yield glory to myself, and your
soul to Hades of the noble steeds."

Thus spoke Sarpedon, and Tlepolemus upraised his spear. They threw at
the same moment, and Sarpedon struck his foe in the middle of his
throat; the spear went right through, and the darkness of death fell
upon his eyes. Tlepolemus's spear struck Sarpedon on the left thigh
with such force that it tore through the flesh and grazed the bone, but
his father as yet warded off destruction from him.

His comrades bore Sarpedon out of the fight, in great pain by the
weight of the spear that was dragging from his wound. They were in such
haste and stress as they bore him that no one thought of drawing the
spear from his thigh so as to let him walk uprightly. Meanwhile the
Achaeans carried off the body of Tlepolemus, whereon Ulysses was moved
to pity, and panted for the fray as he beheld them. He doubted whether
to pursue the son of Jove, or to make slaughter of the Lycian rank and
file; it was not decreed, however, that he should slay the son of Jove;
Minerva, therefore, turned him against the main body of the Lycians. He
killed Coeranus, Alastor, Chromius, Alcandrus, Halius, Noemon, and
Prytanis, and would have slain yet more, had not great Hector marked
him, and sped to the front of the fight clad in his suit of mail,
filling the Danaans with terror. Sarpedon was glad when he saw him
coming, and besought him, saying, "Son of Priam, let me not be here to
fall into the hands of the Danaans. Help me, and since I may not return
home to gladden the hearts of my wife and of my infant son, let me die
within the walls of your city."

Hector made him no answer, but rushed onward to fall at once upon the
Achaeans and kill many among them. His comrades then bore Sarpedon away
and laid him beneath Jove's spreading oak tree. Pelagon, his friend and
comrade, drew the spear out of his thigh, but Sarpedon fainted and a
mist came over his eyes. Presently he came to himself again, for the
breath of the north wind as it played upon him gave him new life, and
brought him out of the deep swoon into which he had fallen.

Meanwhile the Argives were neither driven towards their ships by Mars
and Hector, nor yet did they attack them; when they knew that Mars was
with the Trojans they retreated, but kept their faces still turned
towards the foe. Who, then, was first and who last to be slain by Mars
and Hector? They were valiant Teuthras, and Orestes the renowned
charioteer, Trechus the Aetolian warrior, Oenomaus, Helenus the son of
Oenops, and Oresbius of the gleaming girdle, who was possessed of great
wealth, and dwelt by the Cephisian lake with the other Boeotians who
lived near him, owners of a fertile country.

Now when the goddess Juno saw the Argives thus falling, she said to
Minerva, "Alas, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, the
promise we made Menelaus that he should not return till he had sacked
the city of Ilius will be of no effect if we let Mars rage thus
furiously. Let us go into the fray at once."

Minerva did not gainsay her. Thereon the august goddess, daughter of
great Saturn, began to harness her gold-bedizened steeds. Hebe with all
speed fitted on the eight-spoked wheels of bronze that were on either
side of the iron axle-tree. The felloes of the wheels were of gold,
imperishable, and over these there was a tire of bronze, wondrous to
behold. The naves of the wheels were silver, turning round the axle
upon either side. The car itself was made with plaited bands of gold
and silver, and it had a double top-rail running all round it. From the
body of the car there went a pole of silver, on to the end of which she
bound the golden yoke, with the bands of gold that were to go under the
necks of the horses Then Juno put her steeds under the yoke, eager for
battle and the war-cry.

Meanwhile Minerva flung her richly embroidered vesture, made with her
own hands, on to her father's threshold, and donned the shirt of Jove,
arming herself for battle. She threw her tasselled aegis about her
shoulders, wreathed round with Rout as with a fringe, and on it were
Strife, and Strength, and Panic whose blood runs cold; moreover there
was the head of the dread monster Gorgon, grim and awful to behold,
portent of aegis-bearing Jove. On her head she set her helmet of gold,
with four plumes, and coming to a peak both in front and behind--decked
with the emblems of a hundred cities; then she stepped into her flaming
chariot and grasped the spear, so stout and sturdy and strong, with
which she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her. Juno
lashed the horses on, and the gates of heaven bellowed as they flew
open of their own accord--gates over which the Hours preside, in whose
hands are Heaven and Olympus, either to open the dense cloud that hides
them, or to close it. Through these the goddesses drove their obedient
steeds, and found the son of Saturn sitting all alone on the topmost
ridges of Olympus. There Juno stayed her horses, and spoke to Jove the
son of Saturn, lord of all. "Father Jove," said she, "are you not angry
with Mars for these high doings? how great and goodly a host of the
Achaeans he has destroyed to my great grief, and without either right
or reason, while the Cyprian and Apollo are enjoying it all at their
ease and setting this unrighteous madman on to do further mischief. I
hope, Father Jove, that you will not be angry if I hit Mars hard, and
chase him out of the battle."

And Jove answered, "Set Minerva on to him, for she punishes him more
often than any one else does."

Juno did as he had said. She lashed her horses, and they flew forward
nothing loth midway betwixt earth and sky. As far as a man can see when
he looks out upon the sea from some high beacon, so far can the
loud-neighing horses of the gods spring at a single bound. When they
reached Troy and the place where its two flowing streams Simois and
Scamander meet, there Juno stayed them and took them from the chariot.
She hid them in a thick cloud, and Simois made ambrosia spring up for
them to eat; the two goddesses then went on, flying like turtledoves in
their eagerness to help the Argives. When they came to the part where
the bravest and most in number were gathered about mighty Diomed,
fighting like lions or wild boars of great strength and endurance,
there Juno stood still and raised a shout like that of brazen-voiced
Stentor, whose cry was as loud as that of fifty men together.
"Argives," she cried; "shame on cowardly creatures, brave in semblance
only; as long as Achilles was fighting, if his spear was so deadly that
the Trojans dared not show themselves outside the Dardanian gates, but
now they sally far from the city and fight even at your ships."

With these words she put heart and soul into them all, while Minerva
sprang to the side of the son of Tydeus, whom she found near his
chariot and horses, cooling the wound that Pandarus had given him. For
the sweat caused by the hand that bore the weight of his shield
irritated the hurt: his arm was weary with pain, and he was lifting up
the strap to wipe away the blood. The goddess laid her hand on the yoke
of his horses and said, "The son of Tydeus is not such another as his
father. Tydeus was a little man, but he could fight, and rushed madly
into the fray even when I told him not to do so. When he went all
unattended as envoy to the city of Thebes among the Cadmeans, I bade
him feast in their houses and be at peace; but with that high spirit
which was ever present with him, he challenged the youth of the
Cadmeans, and at once beat them in all that he attempted, so mightily
did I help him. I stand by you too to protect you, and I bid you be
instant in fighting the Trojans; but either you are tired out, or you
are afraid and out of heart, and in that case I say that you are no
true son of Tydeus the son of Oeneus."

Diomed answered, "I know you, goddess, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove,
and will hide nothing from you. I am not afraid nor out of heart, nor
is there any slackness in me. I am only following your own
instructions; you told me not to fight any of the blessed gods; but if
Jove's daughter Venus came into battle I was to wound her with my
spear. Therefore I am retreating, and bidding the other Argives gather
in this place, for I know that Mars is now lording it in the field."

"Diomed, son of Tydeus," replied Minerva, "man after my own heart, fear
neither Mars nor any other of the immortals, for I will befriend you.
Nay, drive straight at Mars, and smite him in close combat; fear not
this raging madman, villain incarnate, first on one side and then on
the other. But now he was holding talk with Juno and myself, saying he
would help the Argives and attack the Trojans; nevertheless he is with
the Trojans, and has forgotten the Argives."

With this she caught hold of Sthenelus and lifted him off the chariot
on to the ground. In a second he was on the ground, whereupon the
goddess mounted the car and placed herself by the side of Diomed. The
oaken axle groaned aloud under the burden of the awful goddess and the
hero; Pallas Minerva took the whip and reins, and drove straight at
Mars. He was in the act of stripping huge Periphas, son of Ochesius and
bravest of the Aetolians. Bloody Mars was stripping him of his armour,
and Minerva donned the helmet of Hades, that he might not see her;
when, therefore, he saw Diomed, he made straight for him and let
Periphas lie where he had fallen. As soon as they were at close
quarters he let fly with his bronze spear over the reins and yoke,
thinking to take Diomed's life, but Minerva caught the spear in her
hand and made it fly harmlessly over the chariot. Diomed then threw,
and Pallas Minerva drove the spear into the pit of Mars's stomach where
his under-girdle went round him. There Diomed wounded him, tearing his
fair flesh and then drawing his spear out again. Mars roared as loudly
as nine or ten thousand men in the thick of a fight, and the Achaeans
and Trojans were struck with panic, so terrible was the cry he raised.

As a dark cloud in the sky when it comes on to blow after heat, even so
did Diomed son of Tydeus see Mars ascend into the broad heavens. With
all speed he reached high Olympus, home of the gods, and in great pain
sat down beside Jove the son of Saturn. He showed Jove the immortal
blood that was flowing from his wound, and spoke piteously, saying,
"Father Jove, are you not angered by such doings? We gods are
continually suffering in the most cruel manner at one another's hands
while helping mortals; and we all owe you a grudge for having begotten
that mad termagant of a daughter, who is always committing outrage of
some kind. We other gods must all do as you bid us, but her you neither
scold nor punish; you encourage her because the pestilent creature is
your daughter. See how she has been inciting proud Diomed to vent his
rage on the immortal gods. First he went up to the Cyprian and wounded
her in the hand near her wrist, and then he sprang upon me too as
though he were a god. Had I not run for it I must either have lain
there for long enough in torments among the ghastly corpses, or have
been eaten alive with spears till I had no more strength left in me."

Jove looked angrily at him and said, "Do not come whining here, Sir
Facing-both-ways. I hate you worst of all the gods in Olympus, for you
are ever fighting and making mischief. You have the intolerable and
stubborn spirit of your mother Juno: it is all I can do to manage her,
and it is her doing that you are now in this plight: still, I cannot
let you remain longer in such great pain; you are my own offspring, and
it was by me that your mother conceived you; if, however, you had been
the son of any other god, you are so destructive that by this time you
should have been lying lower than the Titans."

He then bade Paeeon heal him, whereon Paeeon spread pain-killing herbs
upon his wound and cured him, for he was not of mortal mould. As the
juice of the fig-tree curdles milk, and thickens it in a moment though
it is liquid, even so instantly did Paeeon cure fierce Mars. Then Hebe
washed him, and clothed him in goodly raiment, and he took his seat by
his father Jove all glorious to behold.

But Juno of Argos and Minerva of Alalcomene, now that they had put a
stop to the murderous doings of Mars, went back again to the house of
Jove.