BOOK XXII

  The death of Hector.

THUS the Trojans in the city, scared like fawns, wiped the sweat from
off them and drank to quench their thirst, leaning against the goodly
battlements, while the Achaeans with their shields laid upon their
shoulders drew close up to the walls. But stern fate bade Hector stay
where he was before Ilius and the Scaean gates. Then Phoebus Apollo
spoke to the son of Peleus saying, "Why, son of Peleus, do you, who are
but man, give chase to me who am immortal? Have you not yet found out
that it is a god whom you pursue so furiously? You did not harass the
Trojans whom you had routed, and now they are within their walls, while
you have been decoyed hither away from them. Me you cannot kill, for
death can take no hold upon me."

Achilles was greatly angered and said, "You have baulked me,
Far-Darter, most malicious of all gods, and have drawn me away from the
wall, where many another man would have bitten the dust ere he got
within Ilius; you have robbed me of great glory and have saved the
Trojans at no risk to yourself, for you have nothing to fear, but I
would indeed have my revenge if it were in my power to do so."

On this, with fell intent he made towards the city, and as the winning
horse in a chariot race strains every nerve when he is flying over the
plain, even so fast and furiously did the limbs of Achilles bear him
onwards. King Priam was first to note him as he scoured the plain, all
radiant as the star which men call Orion's Hound, and whose beams blaze
forth in time of harvest more brilliantly than those of any other that
shines by night; brightest of them all though he be, he yet bodes ill
for mortals, for he brings fire and fever in his train--even so did
Achilles' armour gleam on his breast as he sped onwards. Priam raised a
cry and beat his head with his hands as he lifted them up and shouted
out to his dear son, imploring him to return; but Hector still stayed
before the gates, for his heart was set upon doing battle with
Achilles. The old man reached out his arms towards him and bade him for
pity's sake come within the walls. "Hector," he cried, "my son, stay
not to face this man alone and unsupported, or you will meet death at
the hands of the son of Peleus, for he is mightier than you. Monster
that he is; would indeed that the gods loved him no better than I do,
for so, dogs and vultures would soon devour him as he lay stretched on
earth, and a load of grief would be lifted from my heart, for many a
brave son has he reft from me, either by killing them or selling them
away in the islands that are beyond the sea: even now I miss two sons
from among the Trojans who have thronged within the city, Lycaon and
Polydorus, whom Laothoe peeress among women bore me. Should they be
still alive and in the hands of the Achaeans, we will ransom them with
gold and bronze, of which we have store, for the old man Altes endowed
his daughter richly; but if they are already dead and in the house of
Hades, sorrow will it be to us two who were their parents; albeit the
grief of others will be more short-lived unless you too perish at the
hands of Achilles. Come, then, my son, within the city, to be the
guardian of Trojan men and Trojan women, or you will both lose your own
life and afford a mighty triumph to the son of Peleus. Have pity also
on your unhappy father while life yet remains to him--on me, whom the
son of Saturn will destroy by a terrible doom on the threshold of old
age, after I have seen my sons slain and my daughters haled away as
captives, my bridal chambers pillaged, little children dashed to earth
amid the rage of battle, and my sons' wives dragged away by the cruel
hands of the Achaeans; in the end fierce hounds will tear me in pieces
at my own gates after some one has beaten the life out of my body with
sword or spear-hounds that I myself reared and fed at my own table to
guard my gates, but who will yet lap my blood and then lie all
distraught at my doors. When a young man falls by the sword in battle,
he may lie where he is and there is nothing unseemly; let what will be
seen, all is honourable in death, but when an old man is slain there is
nothing in this world more pitiable than that dogs should defile his
grey hair and beard and all that men hide for shame."

The old man tore his grey hair as he spoke, but he moved not the heart
of Hector. His mother hard by wept and moaned aloud as she bared her
bosom and pointed to the breast which had suckled him. "Hector," she
cried, weeping bitterly the while, "Hector, my son, spurn not this
breast, but have pity upon me too: if I have ever given you comfort
from my own bosom, think on it now, dear son, and come within the wall
to protect us from this man; stand not without to meet him. Should the
wretch kill you, neither I nor your richly dowered wife shall ever
weep, dear offshoot of myself, over the bed on which you lie, for dogs
will devour you at the ships of the Achaeans."

Thus did the two with many tears implore their son, but they moved not
the heart of Hector, and he stood his ground awaiting huge Achilles as
he drew nearer towards him. As a serpent in its den upon the mountains,
full fed with deadly poisons, waits for the approach of man--he is
filled with fury and his eyes glare terribly as he goes writhing round
his den--even so Hector leaned his shield against a tower that jutted
out from the wall and stood where he was, undaunted.

"Alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart, "if I go
within the gates, Polydamas will be the first to heap reproach upon me,
for it was he that urged me to lead the Trojans back to the city on
that awful night when Achilles again came forth against us. I would not
listen, but it would have been indeed better if I had done so. Now that
my folly has destroyed the host, I dare not look Trojan men and Trojan
women in the face, lest a worse man should say, 'Hector has ruined us
by his self-confidence.' Surely it would be better for me to return
after having fought Achilles and slain him, or to die gloriously here
before the city. What, again, if I were to lay down my shield and
helmet, lean my spear against the wall and go straight up to noble
Achilles? What if I were to promise to give up Helen, who was the
fountainhead of all this war, and all the treasure that Alexandrus
brought with him in his ships to Troy, aye, and to let the Achaeans
divide the half of everything that the city contains among themselves?
I might make the Trojans, by the mouths of their princes, take a solemn
oath that they would hide nothing, but would divide into two shares all
that is within the city--but why argue with myself in this way? Were I
to go up to him he would show me no kind of mercy; he would kill me
then and there as easily as though I were a woman, when I had off my
armour. There is no parleying with him from some rock or oak tree as
young men and maidens prattle with one another. Better fight him at
once, and learn to which of us Jove will vouchsafe victory."

Thus did he stand and ponder, but Achilles came up to him as it were
Mars himself, plumed lord of battle. From his right shoulder he
brandished his terrible spear of Pelian ash, and the bronze gleamed
around him like flashing fire or the rays of the rising sun. Fear fell
upon Hector as he beheld him, and he dared not stay longer where he was
but fled in dismay from before the gates, while Achilles darted after
him at his utmost speed. As a mountain falcon, swiftest of all birds,
swoops down upon some cowering dove--the dove flies before him but the
falcon with a shrill scream follows close after, resolved to have
her--even so did Achilles make straight for Hector with all his might,
while Hector fled under the Trojan wall as fast as his limbs could take
him.

On they flew along the waggon-road that ran hard by under the wall,
past the lookout station, and past the weather-beaten wild fig-tree,
till they came to two fair springs which feed the river Scamander. One
of these two springs is warm, and steam rises from it as smoke from a
burning fire, but the other even in summer is as cold as hail or snow,
or the ice that forms on water. Here, hard by the springs, are the
goodly washing-troughs of stone, where in the time of peace before the
coming of the Achaeans the wives and fair daughters of the Trojans used
to wash their clothes. Past these did they fly, the one in front and
the other giving chase behind him: good was the man that fled, but
better far was he that followed after, and swiftly indeed did they run,
for the prize was no mere beast for sacrifice or bullock's hide, as it
might be for a common foot-race, but they ran for the life of Hector.
As horses in a chariot race speed round the turning-posts when they are
running for some great prize--a tripod or woman--at the games in honour
of some dead hero, so did these two run full speed three times round
the city of Priam. All the gods watched them, and the sire of gods and
men was the first to speak.

"Alas," said he, "my eyes behold a man who is dear to me being pursued
round the walls of Troy; my heart is full of pity for Hector, who has
burned the thigh-bones of many a heifer in my honour, one while on the
crests of many-valleyed Ida, and again on the citadel of Troy; and now
I see noble Achilles in full pursuit of him round the city of Priam.
What say you? Consider among yourselves and decide whether we shall now
save him or let him fall, valiant though he be, before Achilles, son of
Peleus."

Then Minerva said, "Father, wielder of the lightning, lord of cloud and
storm, what mean you? Would you pluck this mortal whose doom has long
been decreed out of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we others
shall not be of a mind with you."

And Jove answered, "My child, Trito-born, take heart. I did not speak
in full earnest, and I will let you have your way. Do without let or
hindrance as you are minded."

Thus did he urge Minerva who was already eager, and down she darted
from the topmost summits of Olympus.

Achilles was still in full pursuit of Hector, as a hound chasing a fawn
which he has started from its covert on the mountains, and hunts
through glade and thicket. The fawn may try to elude him by crouching
under cover of a bush, but he will scent her out and follow her up
until he gets her--even so there was no escape for Hector from the
fleet son of Peleus. Whenever he made a set to get near the Dardanian
gates and under the walls, that his people might help him by showering
down weapons from above, Achilles would gain on him and head him back
towards the plain, keeping himself always on the city side. As a man in
a dream who fails to lay hands upon another whom he is pursuing--the
one cannot escape nor the other overtake--even so neither could
Achilles come up with Hector, nor Hector break away from Achilles;
nevertheless he might even yet have escaped death had not the time come
when Apollo, who thus far had sustained his strength and nerved his
running, was now no longer to stay by him. Achilles made signs to the
Achaean host, and shook his head to show that no man was to aim a dart
at Hector, lest another might win the glory of having hit him and he
might himself come in second. Then, at last, as they were nearing the
fountains for the fourth time, the father of all balanced his golden
scales and placed a doom in each of them, one for Achilles and the
other for Hector. As he held the scales by the middle, the doom of
Hector fell down deep into the house of Hades--and then Phoebus Apollo
left him. Thereon Minerva went close up to the son of Peleus and said,
"Noble Achilles, favoured of heaven, we two shall surely take back to
the ships a triumph for the Achaeans by slaying Hector, for all his
lust of battle. Do what Apollo may as he lies grovelling before his
father, aegis-bearing Jove, Hector cannot escape us longer. Stay here
and take breath, while I go up to him and persuade him to make a stand
and fight you."

Thus spoke Minerva. Achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still,
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while Minerva left him and
went after Hector in the form and with the voice of Deiphobus. She came
close up to him and said, "Dear brother, I see you are hard pressed by
Achilles who is chasing you at full speed round the city of Priam, let
us await his onset and stand on our defence."

And Hector answered, "Deiphobus, you have always been dearest to me of
all my brothers, children of Hecuba and Priam, but henceforth I shall
rate you yet more highly, inasmuch as you have ventured outside the
wall for my sake when all the others remain inside."

Then Minerva said, "Dear brother, my father and mother went down on
their knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain inside,
so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but I was in an agony of
grief when I beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make a stand and
fight, and let there be no keeping our spears in reserve, that we may
learn whether Achilles shall kill us and bear off our spoils to the
ships, or whether he shall fall before you."

Thus did Minerva inveigle him by her cunning, and when the two were now
close to one another great Hector was first to speak. "I will no longer
fly you, son of Peleus," said he, "as I have been doing hitherto. Three
times have I fled round the mighty city of Priam, without daring to
withstand you, but now, let me either slay or be slain, for I am in the
mind to face you. Let us, then, give pledges to one another by our
gods, who are the fittest witnesses and guardians of all covenants; let
it be agreed between us that if Jove vouchsafes me the longer stay and
I take your life, I am not to treat your dead body in any unseemly
fashion, but when I have stripped you of your armour, I am to give up
your body to the Achaeans. And do you likewise."

Achilles glared at him and answered, "Fool, prate not to me about
covenants. There can be no covenants between men and lions, wolves and
lambs can never be of one mind, but hate each other out and out all
through. Therefore there can be no understanding between you and me,
nor may there be any covenants between us, till one or other shall fall
and glut grim Mars with his life's blood. Put forth all your strength;
you have need now to prove yourself indeed a bold soldier and man of
war. You have no more chance, and Pallas Minerva will forthwith
vanquish you by my spear: you shall now pay me in full for the grief
you have caused me on account of my comrades whom you have killed in
battle."

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. Hector saw it coming and
avoided it; he watched it and crouched down so that it flew over his
head and stuck in the ground beyond; Minerva then snatched it up and
gave it back to Achilles without Hector's seeing her; Hector thereon
said to the son of Peleus, "You have missed your aim, Achilles, peer of
the gods, and Jove has not yet revealed to you the hour of my doom,
though you made sure that he had done so. You were a false-tongued liar
when you deemed that I should forget my valour and quail before you.
You shall not drive your spear into the back of a runaway--drive it,
should heaven so grant you power, drive it into me as I make straight
towards you; and now for your own part avoid my spear if you can--would
that you might receive the whole of it into your body; if you were once
dead the Trojans would find the war an easier matter, for it is you who
have harmed them most."

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. His aim was true for he
hit the middle of Achilles' shield, but the spear rebounded from it,
and did not pierce it. Hector was angry when he saw that the weapon had
sped from his hand in vain, and stood there in dismay for he had no
second spear. With a loud cry he called Deiphobus and asked him for
one, but there was no man; then he saw the truth and said to himself,
"Alas! the gods have lured me on to my destruction. I deemed that the
hero Deiphobus was by my side, but he is within the wall, and Minerva
has inveigled me; death is now indeed exceedingly near at hand and
there is no way out of it--for so Jove and his son Apollo the
far-darter have willed it, though heretofore they have been ever ready
to protect me. My doom has come upon me; let me not then die
ingloriously and without a struggle, but let me first do some great
thing that shall be told among men hereafter."

As he spoke he drew the keen blade that hung so great and strong by his
side, and gathering himself together be sprang on Achilles like a
soaring eagle which swoops down from the clouds on to some lamb or
timid hare--even so did Hector brandish his sword and spring upon
Achilles. Achilles mad with rage darted towards him, with his wondrous
shield before his breast, and his gleaming helmet, made with four
layers of metal, nodding fiercely forward. The thick tresses of gold
with which Vulcan had crested the helmet floated round it, and as the
evening star that shines brighter than all others through the stillness
of night, even such was the gleam of the spear which Achilles poised in
his right hand, fraught with the death of noble Hector. He eyed his
fair flesh over and over to see where he could best wound it, but all
was protected by the goodly armour of which Hector had spoiled
Patroclus after he had slain him, save only the throat where the
collar-bones divide the neck from the shoulders, and this is a most
deadly place: here then did Achilles strike him as he was coming on
towards him, and the point of his spear went right through the fleshy
part of the neck, but it did not sever his windpipe so that he could
still speak. Hector fell headlong, and Achilles vaunted over him
saying, "Hector, you deemed that you should come off scatheless when
you were spoiling Patroclus, and recked not of myself who was not with
him. Fool that you were: for I, his comrade, mightier far than he, was
still left behind him at the ships, and now I have laid you low. The
Achaeans shall give him all due funeral rites, while dogs and vultures
shall work their will upon yourself."

Then Hector said, as the life ebbed out of him, "I pray you by your
life and knees, and by your parents, let not dogs devour me at the
ships of the Achaeans, but accept the rich treasure of gold and bronze
which my father and mother will offer you, and send my body home, that
the Trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when I am dead."

Achilles glared at him and answered, "Dog, talk not to me neither of
knees nor parents; would that I could be as sure of being able to cut
your flesh into pieces and eat it raw, for the ill you have done me, as
I am that nothing shall save you from the dogs--it shall not be, though
they bring ten or twenty-fold ransom and weigh it out for me on the
spot, with promise of yet more hereafter. Though Priam son of Dardanus
should bid them offer me your weight in gold, even so your mother shall
never lay you out and make lament over the son she bore, but dogs and
vultures shall eat you utterly up."

Hector with his dying breath then said, "I know you what you are, and
was sure that I should not move you, for your heart is hard as iron;
look to it that I bring not heaven's anger upon you on the day when
Paris and Phoebus Apollo, valiant though you be, shall slay you at the
Scaean gates."

When he had thus said the shrouds of death enfolded him, whereon his
soul went out of him and flew down to the house of Hades, lamenting its
sad fate that it should enjoy youth and strength no longer. But
Achilles said, speaking to the dead body, "Die; for my part I will
accept my fate whensoever Jove and the other gods see fit to send it."

As he spoke he drew his spear from the body and set it on one side;
then he stripped the blood-stained armour from Hector's shoulders while
the other Achaeans came running up to view his wondrous strength and
beauty; and no one came near him without giving him a fresh wound. Then
would one turn to his neighbour and say, "It is easier to handle Hector
now than when he was flinging fire on to our ships"--and as he spoke he
would thrust his spear into him anew.

When Achilles had done spoiling Hector of his armour, he stood among
the Argives and said, "My friends, princes and counsellors of the
Argives, now that heaven has vouchsafed us to overcome this man, who
has done us more hurt than all the others together, consider whether we
should not attack the city in force, and discover in what mind the
Trojans may be. We should thus learn whether they will desert their
city now that Hector has fallen, or will still hold out even though he
is no longer living. But why argue with myself in this way, while
Patroclus is still lying at the ships unburied, and unmourned--he whom
I can never forget so long as I am alive and my strength fails not?
Though men forget their dead when once they are within the house of
Hades, yet not even there will I forget the comrade whom I have lost.
Now, therefore, Achaean youths, let us raise the song of victory and go
back to the ships taking this man along with us; for we have achieved a
mighty triumph and have slain noble Hector to whom the Trojans prayed
throughout their city as though he were a god."

On this he treated the body of Hector with contumely: he pierced the
sinews at the back of both his feet from heel to ancle and passed
thongs of ox-hide through the slits he had made: thus he made the body
fast to his chariot, letting the head trail upon the ground. Then when
he had put the goodly armour on the chariot and had himself mounted, he
lashed his horses on and they flew forward nothing loth. The dust rose
from Hector as he was being dragged along, his dark hair flew all
abroad, and his head once so comely was laid low on earth, for Jove had
now delivered him into the hands of his foes to do him outrage in his
own land.

Thus was the head of Hector being dishonoured in the dust. His mother
tore her hair, and flung her veil from her with a loud cry as she
looked upon her son. His father made piteous moan, and throughout the
city the people fell to weeping and wailing. It was as though the whole
of frowning Ilius was being smirched with fire. Hardly could the people
hold Priam back in his hot haste to rush without the gates of the city.
He grovelled in the mire and besought them, calling each one of them by
his name. "Let be, my friends," he cried, "and for all your sorrow,
suffer me to go single-handed to the ships of the Achaeans. Let me
beseech this cruel and terrible man, if maybe he will respect the
feeling of his fellow-men, and have compassion on my old age. His own
father is even such another as myself--Peleus, who bred him and reared
him to be the bane of us Trojans, and of myself more than of all
others. Many a son of mine has he slain in the flower of his youth, and
yet, grieve for these as I may, I do so for one--Hector--more than for
them all, and the bitterness of my sorrow will bring me down to the
house of Hades. Would that he had died in my arms, for so both his
ill-starred mother who bore him, and myself, should have had the
comfort of weeping and mourning over him."

Thus did he speak with many tears, and all the people of the city
joined in his lament. Hecuba then raised the cry of wailing among the
Trojans. "Alas, my son," she cried, "what have I left to live for now
that you are no more? Night and day did I glory in you throughout the
city, for you were a tower of strength to all in Troy, and both men and
women alike hailed you as a god. So long as you lived you were their
pride, but now death and destruction have fallen upon you."

Hector's wife had as yet heard nothing, for no one had come to tell her
that her husband had remained without the gates. She was at her loom in
an inner part of the house, weaving a double purple web, and
embroidering it with many flowers. She told her maids to set a large
tripod on the fire, so as to have a warm bath ready for Hector when he
came out of battle; poor woman, she knew not that he was now beyond the
reach of baths, and that Minerva had laid him low by the hands of
Achilles. She heard the cry coming as from the wall, and trembled in
every limb; the shuttle fell from her hands, and again she spoke to her
waiting-women. "Two of you," she said, "come with me that I may learn
what it is that has befallen; I heard the voice of my husband's
honoured mother; my own heart beats as though it would come into my
mouth and my limbs refuse to carry me; some great misfortune for
Priam's children must be at hand. May I never live to hear it, but I
greatly fear that Achilles has cut off the retreat of brave Hector and
has chased him on to the plain where he was singlehanded; I fear he may
have put an end to the reckless daring which possessed my husband, who
would never remain with the body of his men, but would dash on far in
front, foremost of them all in valour."

Her heart beat fast, and as she spoke she flew from the house like a
maniac, with her waiting-women following after. When she reached the
battlements and the crowd of people, she stood looking out upon the
wall, and saw Hector being borne away in front of the city--the horses
dragging him without heed or care over the ground towards the ships of
the Achaeans. Her eyes were then shrouded as with the darkness of night
and she fell fainting backwards. She tore the attiring from her head
and flung it from her, the frontlet and net with its plaited band, and
the veil which golden Venus had given her on the day when Hector took
her with him from the house of Eetion, after having given countless
gifts of wooing for her sake. Her husband's sisters and the wives of
his brothers crowded round her and supported her, for she was fain to
die in her distraction; when she again presently breathed and came to
herself, she sobbed and made lament among the Trojans saying, "Woe is
me, O Hector; woe, indeed, that to share a common lot we were born, you
at Troy in the house of Priam, and I at Thebes under the wooded
mountain of Placus in the house of Eetion who brought me up when I was
a child--ill-starred sire of an ill-starred daughter--would that he had
never begotten me. You are now going into the house of Hades under the
secret places of the earth, and you leave me a sorrowing widow in your
house. The child, of whom you and I are the unhappy parents, is as yet
a mere infant. Now that you are gone, O Hector, you can do nothing for
him nor he for you. Even though he escape the horrors of this woeful
war with the Achaeans, yet shall his life henceforth be one of labour
and sorrow, for others will seize his lands. The day that robs a child
of his parents severs him from his own kind; his head is bowed, his
cheeks are wet with tears, and he will go about destitute among the
friends of his father, plucking one by the cloak and another by the
shirt. Some one or other of these may so far pity him as to hold the
cup for a moment towards him and let him moisten his lips, but he must
not drink enough to wet the roof of his mouth; then one whose parents
are alive will drive him from the table with blows and angry words.
'Out with you,' he will say, 'you have no father here,' and the child
will go crying back to his widowed mother--he, Astyanax, who erewhile
would sit upon his father's knees, and have none but the daintiest and
choicest morsels set before him. When he had played till he was tired
and went to sleep, he would lie in a bed, in the arms of his nurse, on
a soft couch, knowing neither want nor care, whereas now that he has
lost his father his lot will be full of hardship--he, whom the Trojans
name Astyanax, because you, O Hector, were the only defence of their
gates and battlements. The wriggling writhing worms will now eat you at
the ships, far from your parents, when the dogs have glutted themselves
upon you. You will lie naked, although in your house you have fine and
goodly raiment made by hands of women. This will I now burn; it is of
no use to you, for you can never again wear it, and thus you will have
respect shown you by the Trojans both men and women."

In such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears, and the women joined in
her lament.
