BOOK XV

  Jove awakes, tells Apollo to heal Hector, and the Trojans
  again become victorious.

BUT when their flight had taken them past the trench and the set
stakes, and many had fallen by the hands of the Danaans, the Trojans
made a halt on reaching their chariots, routed and pale with fear. Jove
now woke on the crests of Ida, where he was lying with golden-throned
Juno by his side, and starting to his feet he saw the Trojans and
Achaeans, the one thrown into confusion, and the others driving them
pell-mell before them with King Neptune in their midst. He saw Hector
lying on the ground with his comrades gathered round him, gasping for
breath, wandering in mind and vomiting blood, for it was not the
feeblest of the Achaeans who struck him.

The sire of gods and men had pity on him, and looked fiercely on Juno.
"I see, Juno," said he, "you mischief-making trickster, that your
cunning has stayed Hector from fighting and has caused the rout of his
host. I am in half a mind to thrash you, in which case you will be the
first to reap the fruits of your scurvy knavery. Do you not remember
how once upon a time I had you hanged? I fastened two anvils on to your
feet, and bound your hands in a chain of gold which none might break,
and you hung in mid-air among the clouds. All the gods in Olympus were
in a fury, but they could not reach you to set you free; when I caught
any one of them I gripped him and hurled him from the heavenly
threshold till he came fainting down to earth; yet even this did not
relieve my mind from the incessant anxiety which I felt about noble
Hercules whom you and Boreas had spitefully conveyed beyond the seas to
Cos, after suborning the tempests; but I rescued him, and
notwithstanding all his mighty labours I brought him back again to
Argos. I would remind you of this that you may learn to leave off being
so deceitful, and discover how much you are likely to gain by the
embraces out of which you have come here to trick me."

Juno trembled as he spoke, and said, "May heaven above and earth below
be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx--and this is the
most solemn oath that a blessed god can take--nay, I swear also by your
own almighty head and by our bridal bed--things over which I could
never possibly perjure myself--that Neptune is not punishing Hector and
the Trojans and helping the Achaeans through any doing of mine; it is
all of his own mere motion because he was sorry to see the Achaeans
hard pressed at their ships: if I were advising him, I should tell him
to do as you bid him."

The sire of gods and men smiled and answered, "If you, Juno, were
always to support me when we sit in council of the gods, Neptune, like
it or no, would soon come round to your and my way of thinking. If,
then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among the
rank and file of the gods, and tell Iris and Apollo lord of the bow,
that I want them--Iris, that she may go to the Achaean host and tell
Neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and Apollo, that he may send
Hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus
forget his present sufferings, and drive the Achaeans back in confusion
till they fall among the ships of Achilles son of Peleus. Achilles will
then send his comrade Patroclus into battle, and Hector will kill him
in front of Ilius after he has slain many warriors, and among them my
own noble son Sarpedon. Achilles will kill Hector to avenge Patroclus,
and from that time I will bring it about that the Achaeans shall
persistently drive the Trojans back till they fulfil the counsels of
Minerva and take Ilius. But I will not stay my anger, nor permit any
god to help the Danaans till I have accomplished the desire of the son
of Peleus, according to the promise I made by bowing my head on the day
when Thetis touched my knees and besought me to give him honour."

Juno heeded his words and went from the heights of Ida to great
Olympus. Swift as the thought of one whose fancy carries him over vast
continents, and he says to himself, "Now I will be here, or there," and
he would have all manner of things--even so swiftly did Juno wing her
way till she came to high Olympus and went in among the gods who were
gathered in the house of Jove. When they saw her they all of them came
up to her, and held out their cups to her by way of greeting. She let
the others be, but took the cup offered her by lovely Themis, who was
first to come running up to her. "Juno," said she, "why are you here?
And you seem troubled--has your husband the son of Saturn been
frightening you?"

And Juno answered, "Themis, do not ask me about it. You know what a
proud and cruel disposition my husband has. Lead the gods to table,
where you and all the immortals can hear the wicked designs which he
has avowed. Many a one, mortal and immortal, will be angered by them,
however peaceably he may be feasting now."

On this Juno sat down, and the gods were troubled throughout the house
of Jove. Laughter sat on her lips but her brow was furrowed with care,
and she spoke up in a rage. "Fools that we are," she cried, "to be thus
madly angry with Jove; we keep on wanting to go up to him and stay him
by force or by persuasion, but he sits aloof and cares for nobody, for
he knows that he is much stronger than any other of the immortals. Make
the best, therefore, of whatever ills he may choose to send each one of
you; Mars, I take it, has had a taste of them already, for his son
Ascalaphus has fallen in battle--the man whom of all others he loved
most dearly and whose father he owns himself to be."

When he heard this Mars smote his two sturdy thighs with the flat of
his hands, and said in anger, "Do not blame me, you gods that dwell in
heaven, if I go to the ships of the Achaeans and avenge the death of my
son, even though it end in my being struck by Jove's lightning and
lying in blood and dust among the corpses."

As he spoke he gave orders to yoke his horses Panic and Rout, while he
put on his armour. On this, Jove would have been roused to still more
fierce and implacable enmity against the other immortals, had not
Minerva, alarmed for the safety of the gods, sprung from her seat and
hurried outside. She tore the helmet from his head and the shield from
his shoulders, and she took the bronze spear from his strong hand and
set it on one side; then she said to Mars, "Madman, you are undone; you
have ears that hear not, or you have lost all judgement and
understanding; have you not heard what Juno has said on coming straight
from the presence of Olympian Jove? Do you wish to go through all kinds
of suffering before you are brought back sick and sorry to Olympus,
after having caused infinite mischief to all us others? Jove would
instantly leave the Trojans and Achaeans to themselves; he would come
to Olympus to punish us, and would grip us up one after another, guilty
or not guilty. Therefore lay aside your anger for the death of your
son; better men than he have either been killed already or will fall
hereafter, and one cannot protect every one's whole family."

With these words she took Mars back to his seat. Meanwhile Juno called
Apollo outside, with Iris the messenger of the gods. "Jove," she said
to them, "desires you to go to him at once on Mt. Ida; when you have
seen him you are to do as he may then bid you."

Thereon Juno left them and resumed her seat inside, while Iris and
Apollo made all haste on their way. When they reached many-fountained
Ida, mother of wild beasts, they found Jove seated on topmost Gargarus
with a fragrant cloud encircling his head as with a diadem. They stood
before his presence, and he was pleased with them for having been so
quick in obeying the orders his wife had given them.

He spoke to Iris first. "Go," said he, "fleet Iris, tell King Neptune
what I now bid you--and tell him true. Bid him leave off fighting, and
either join the company of the gods, or go down into the sea. If he
takes no heed and disobeys me, let him consider well whether he is
strong enough to hold his own against me if I attack him. I am older
and much stronger than he is; yet he is not afraid to set himself up as
on a level with myself, of whom all the other gods stand in awe."

Iris, fleet as the wind, obeyed him, and as the cold hail or snowflakes
that fly from out the clouds before the blast of Boreas, even so did
she wing her way till she came close up to the great shaker of the
earth. Then she said, "I have come, O dark-haired king that holds the
world in his embrace, to bring you a message from Jove. He bids you
leave off fighting, and either join the company of the gods or go down
into the sea; if, however, you take no heed and disobey him, he says he
will come down here and fight you. He would have you keep out of his
reach, for he is older and much stronger than you are, and yet you are
not afraid to set yourself up as on a level with himself, of whom all
the other gods stand in awe."

Neptune was very angry and said, "Great heavens! strong as Jove may be,
he has said more than he can do if he has threatened violence against
me, who am of like honour with himself. We were three brothers whom
Rhea bore to Saturn--Jove, myself, and Hades who rules the world below.
Heaven and earth were divided into three parts, and each of us was to
have an equal share. When we cast lots, it fell to me to have my
dwelling in the sea for evermore; Hades took the darkness of the realms
under the earth, while air and sky and clouds were the portion that
fell to Jove; but earth and great Olympus are the common property of
all. Therefore I will not walk as Jove would have me. For all his
strength, let him keep to his own third share and be contented without
threatening to lay hands upon me as though I were nobody. Let him keep
his bragging talk for his own sons and daughters, who must perforce
obey him."

Iris fleet as the wind then answered, "Am I really, Neptune, to take
this daring and unyielding message to Jove, or will you reconsider your
answer? Sensible people are open to argument, and you know that the
Erinyes always range themselves on the side of the older person."

Neptune answered, "Goddess Iris, your words have been spoken in season.
It is well when a messenger shows so much discretion. Nevertheless it
cuts me to the very heart that any one should rebuke so angrily another
who is his own peer, and of like empire with himself. Now, however, I
will give way in spite of my displeasure; furthermore let me tell you,
and I mean what I say--if contrary to the desire of myself, Minerva
driver of the spoil, Juno, Mercury, and King Vulcan, Jove spares steep
Ilius, and will not let the Achaeans have the great triumph of sacking
it, let him understand that he will incur our implacable resentment."

Neptune now left the field to go down under the sea, and sorely did the
Achaeans miss him. Then Jove said to Apollo, "Go, dear Phoebus, to
Hector, for Neptune who holds the earth in his embrace has now gone
down under the sea to avoid the severity of my displeasure. Had he not
done so those gods who are below with Saturn would have come to hear of
the fight between us. It is better for both of us that he should have
curbed his anger and kept out of my reach, for I should have had much
trouble with him. Take, then, your tasselled aegis, and shake it
furiously, so as to set the Achaean heroes in a panic; take, moreover,
brave Hector, O Far-Darter, into your own care, and rouse him to deeds
of daring, till the Achaeans are sent flying back to their ships and to
the Hellespont. From that point I will think it well over, how the
Achaeans may have a respite from their troubles."

Apollo obeyed his father's saying, and left the crests of Ida, flying
like a falcon, bane of doves and swiftest of all birds. He found Hector
no longer lying upon the ground, but sitting up, for he had just come
to himself again. He knew those who were about him, and the sweat and
hard breathing had left him from the moment when the will of
aegis-bearing Jove had revived him. Apollo stood beside him and said,
"Hector son of Priam, why are you so faint, and why are you here away
from the others? Has any mishap befallen you?"

Hector in a weak voice answered, "And which, kind sir, of the gods are
you, who now ask me thus? Do you not know that Ajax struck me on the
chest with a stone as I was killing his comrades at the ships of the
Achaeans, and compelled me to leave off fighting? I made sure that this
very day I should breathe my last and go down into the house of Hades."

Then King Apollo said to him, "Take heart; the son of Saturn has sent
you a mighty helper from Ida to stand by you and defend you, even me,
Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword, who have been guardian hitherto not
only of yourself but of your city. Now, therefore, order your horsemen
to drive their chariots to the ships in great multitudes. I will go
before your horses to smooth the way for them, and will turn the
Achaeans in flight."

As he spoke he infused great strength into the shepherd of his people.
And as a horse, stabled and full-fed, breaks loose and gallops
gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to take his
bath in the river--he tosses his head, and his mane streams over his
shoulders as in all the pride of his strength he flies full speed to
the pastures where the mares are feeding--even so Hector, when he heard
what the god said, urged his horsemen on, and sped forward as fast as
his limbs could take him. As country peasants set their hounds on to a
homed stag or wild goat--he has taken shelter under rock or thicket,
and they cannot find him, but, lo, a bearded lion whom their shouts
have roused stands in their path, and they are in no further humour for
the chase--even so the Achaeans were still charging on in a body, using
their swords and spears pointed at both ends, but when they saw Hector
going about among his men they were afraid, and their hearts fell down
into their feet.

Then spoke Thoas son of Andraemon, leader of the Aetolians, a man who
could throw a good throw, and who was staunch also in close fight,
while few could surpass him in debate when opinions were divided. He
then with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: "What, in
heaven's name, do I now see? Is it not Hector come to life again? Every
one made sure he had been killed by Ajax son of Telamon, but it seems
that one of the gods has again rescued him. He has killed many of us
Danaans already, and I take it will yet do so, for the hand of Jove
must be with him or he would never dare show himself so masterful in
the forefront of the battle. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say;
let us order the main body of our forces to fall back upon the ships,
but let those of us who profess to be the flower of the army stand
firm, and see whether we cannot hold Hector back at the point of our
spears as soon as he comes near us; I conceive that he will then think
better of it before he tries to charge into the press of the Danaans."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. Those who were
about Ajax and King Idomeneus, the followers moreover of Teucer,
Meriones, and Meges peer of Mars called all their best men about them
and sustained the fight against Hector and the Trojans, but the main
body fell back upon the ships of the Achaeans.

The Trojans pressed forward in a dense body, with Hector striding on at
their head. Before him went Phoebus Apollo shrouded in cloud about his
shoulders. He bore aloft the terrible aegis with its shaggy fringe,
which Vulcan the smith had given Jove to strike terror into the hearts
of men. With this in his hand he led on the Trojans.

The Argives held together and stood their ground. The cry of battle
rose high from either side, and the arrows flew from the bowstrings.
Many a spear sped from strong hands and fastened in the bodies of many
a valiant warrior, while others fell to earth midway, before they could
taste of man's fair flesh and glut themselves with blood. So long as
Phoebus Apollo held his aegis quietly and without shaking it, the
weapons on either side took effect and the people fell, but when he
shook it straight in the face of the Danaans and raised his mighty
battle-cry their hearts fainted within them and they forgot their
former prowess. As when two wild beasts spring in the dead of night on
a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep when the herdsman is not
there--even so were the Danaans struck helpless, for Apollo filled them
with panic and gave victory to Hector and the Trojans.

The fight then became more scattered and they killed one another where
they best could. Hector killed Stichius and Arcesilaus, the one, leader
of the Boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade of Menestheus.
Aeneas killed Medon and Iasus. The first was bastard son to Oileus, and
brother to Ajax, but he lived in Phylace away from his own country, for
he had killed a man, a kinsman of his stepmother Eriopis whom Oileus
had married. Iasus had become a leader of the Athenians, and was son of
Sphelus the son of Boucolos. Polydamas killed Mecisteus, and Polites
Echius, in the front of the battle, while Agenor slew Clonius. Paris
struck Deiochus from behind in the lower part of the shoulder, as he
was flying among the foremost, and the point of the spear went clean
through him.

While they were spoiling these heroes of their armour, the Achaeans
were flying pell-mell to the trench and the set stakes, and were forced
back within their wall. Hector then cried out to the Trojans, "Forward
to the ships, and let the spoils be. If I see any man keeping back on
the other side the wall away from the ships I will have him killed: his
kinsmen and kinswomen shall not give him his dues of fire, but dogs
shall tear him in pieces in front of our city."

As he spoke he laid his whip about his horses' shoulders and called to
the Trojans throughout their ranks; the Trojans shouted with a cry that
rent the air, and kept their horses neck and neck with his own. Phoebus
Apollo went before, and kicked down the banks of the deep trench into
its middle so as to make a great broad bridge, as broad as the throw of
a spear when a man is trying his strength. The Trojan battalions poured
over the bridge, and Apollo with his redoubtable aegis led the way. He
kicked down the wall of the Achaeans as easily as a child who playing
on the sea-shore has built a house of sand and then kicks it down again
and destroys it--even so did you, O Apollo, shed toil and trouble upon
the Argives, filling them with panic and confusion.

Thus then were the Achaeans hemmed in at their ships, calling out to
one another and raising their hands with loud cries every man to
heaven. Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans, lifted up
his hands to the starry firmament of heaven, and prayed more fervently
than any of them. "Father Jove," said he, "if ever any one in
wheat-growing Argos burned you fat thigh-bones of sheep or heifer and
prayed that he might return safely home, whereon you bowed your head to
him in assent, bear it in mind now, and suffer not the Trojans to
triumph thus over the Achaeans."

All-counselling Jove thundered loudly in answer to the prayer of the
aged son of Neleus. When they heard Jove thunder they flung themselves
yet more fiercely on the Achaeans. As a wave breaking over the bulwarks
of a ship when the sea runs high before a gale--for it is the force of
the wind that makes the waves so great--even so did the Trojans spring
over the wall with a shout, and drive their chariots onwards. The two
sides fought with their double-pointed spears in hand-to-hand
encounter-the Trojans from their chariots, and the Achaeans climbing up
into their ships and wielding the long pikes that were lying on the
decks ready for use in a sea-fight, jointed and shod with bronze.

Now Patroclus, so long as the Achaeans and Trojans were fighting about
the wall, but were not yet within it and at the ships, remained sitting
in the tent of good Eurypylus, entertaining him with his conversation
and spreading herbs over his wound to ease his pain. When, however, he
saw the Trojans swarming through the breach in the wall, while the
Achaeans were clamouring and struck with panic, he cried aloud, and
smote his two thighs with the flat of his hands. "Eurypylus," said he
in his dismay, "I know you want me badly, but I cannot stay with you
any longer, for there is hard fighting going on; a servant shall take
care of you now, for I must make all speed to Achilles, and induce him
to fight if I can; who knows but with heaven's help I may persuade him.
A man does well to listen to the advice of a friend."

When he had thus spoken he went his way. The Achaeans stood firm and
resisted the attack of the Trojans, yet though these were fewer in
number, they could not drive them back from the ships, neither could
the Trojans break the Achaean ranks and make their way in among the
tents and ships. As a carpenter's line gives a true edge to a piece of
ship's timber, in the hand of some skilled workman whom Minerva has
instructed in all kinds of useful arts--even so level was the issue of
the fight between the two sides, as they fought some round one and some
round another.

Hector made straight for Ajax, and the two fought fiercely about the
same ship. Hector could not force Ajax back and fire the ship, nor yet
could Ajax drive Hector from the spot to which heaven had brought him.

Then Ajax struck Caletor son of Clytius in the chest with a spear as he
was bringing fire towards the ship. He fell heavily to the ground and
the torch dropped from his hand. When Hector saw his cousin fallen in
front of the ship he shouted to the Trojans and Lycians saying,
"Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians good in close fight, bate not a jot,
but rescue the son of Clytius lest the Achaeans strip him of his armour
now that he has fallen."

He then aimed a spear at Ajax, and missed him, but he hit Lycophron a
follower of Ajax, who came from Cythera, but was living with Ajax
inasmuch as he had killed a man among the Cythereans. Hector's spear
struck him on the head below the ear, and he fell headlong from the
ship's prow on to the ground with no life left in him. Ajax shook with
rage and said to his brother, "Teucer, my good fellow, our trusty
comrade the son of Mastor has fallen, he came to live with us from
Cythera and whom we honoured as much as our own parents. Hector has
just killed him; fetch your deadly arrows at once and the bow which
Phoebus Apollo gave you."

Teucer heard him and hastened towards him with his bow and quiver in
his hands. Forthwith he showered his arrows on the Trojans, and hit
Cleitus the son of Pisenor, comrade of Polydamas the noble son of
Panthous, with the reins in his hands as he was attending to his
horses; he was in the middle of the very thickest part of the fight,
doing good service to Hector and the Trojans, but evil had now come
upon him, and not one of those who were fain to do so could avert it,
for the arrow struck him on the back of the neck. He fell from his
chariot and his horses shook the empty car as they swerved aside. King
Polydamas saw what had happened, and was the first to come up to the
horses; he gave them in charge to Astynous son of Protiaon, and ordered
him to look on, and to keep the horses near at hand. He then went back
and took his place in the front ranks.

Teucer then aimed another arrow at Hector, and there would have been no
more fighting at the ships if he had hit him and killed him then and
there: Jove, however, who kept watch over Hector, had his eyes on
Teucer, and deprived him of his triumph, by breaking his bowstring for
him just as he was drawing it and about to take his aim; on this the
arrow went astray and the bow fell from his hands. Teucer shook with
anger and said to his brother, "Alas, see how heaven thwarts us in all
we do; it has broken my bowstring and snatched the bow from my hand,
though I strung it this selfsame morning that it might serve me for
many an arrow."

Ajax son of Telamon answered, "My good fellow, let your bow and your
arrows be, for Jove has made them useless in order to spite the
Danaans. Take your spear, lay your shield upon your shoulder, and both
fight the Trojans yourself and urge others to do so. They may be
successful for the moment but if we fight as we ought they will find it
a hard matter to take the ships."

Teucer then took his bow and put it by in his tent. He hung a shield
four hides thick about his shoulders, and on his comely head he set his
helmet well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly
above it; he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and forthwith
he was by the side of Ajax.

When Hector saw that Teucer's bow was of no more use to him, he shouted
out to the Trojans and Lycians, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians good
in close fight, be men, my friends, and show your mettle here at the
ships, for I see the weapon of one of their chieftains made useless by
the hand of Jove. It is easy to see when Jove is helping people and
means to help them still further, or again when he is bringing them
down and will do nothing for them; he is now on our side, and is going
against the Argives. Therefore swarm round the ships and fight. If any
of you is struck by spear or sword and loses his life, let him die; he
dies with honour who dies fighting for his country; and he will leave
his wife and children safe behind him, with his house and allotment
unplundered if only the Achaeans can be driven back to their own land,
they and their ships."

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Ajax on the other
side exhorted his comrades saying, "Shame on you Argives, we are now
utterly undone, unless we can save ourselves by driving the enemy from
our ships. Do you think, if Hector takes them, that you will be able to
get home by land? Can you not hear him cheering on his whole host to
fire our fleet, and bidding them remember that they are not at a dance
but in battle? Our only course is to fight them with might and main; we
had better chance it, life or death, once for all, than fight long and
without issue hemmed in at our ships by worse men than ourselves."

With these words he put life and soul into them all. Hector then killed
Schedius son of Perimedes, leader of the Phoceans, and Ajax killed
Laodamas captain of foot soldiers and son to Antenor. Polydamas killed
Otus of Cyllene a comrade of the son of Phyleus and chief of the proud
Epeans. When Meges saw this he sprang upon him, but Polydamas crouched
down, and he missed him, for Apollo would not suffer the son of
Panthous to fall in battle; but the spear hit Croesmus in the middle of
his chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and Meges stripped
him of his armour. At that moment the valiant soldier Dolops son of
Lampus sprang upon Lampus was son of Laomedon and noted for his valour,
while his son Dolops was versed in all the ways of war. He then struck
the middle of the son of Phyleus' shield with his spear, setting on him
at close quarters, but his good corslet made with plates of metal saved
him; Phyleus had brought it from Ephyra and the river Selleis, where
his host, King Euphetes, had given it him to wear in battle and protect
him. It now served to save the life of his son. Then Meges struck the
topmost crest of Dolops's bronze helmet with his spear and tore away
its plume of horse-hair, so that all newly dyed with scarlet as it was
it tumbled down into the dust. While he was still fighting and
confident of victory, Menelaus came up to help Meges, and got by the
side of Dolops unperceived; he then speared him in the shoulder, from
behind, and the point, driven so furiously, went through into his
chest, whereon he fell headlong. The two then made towards him to strip
him of his armour, but Hector called on all his brothers for help, and
he especially upbraided brave Melanippus son of Hiketaon, who erewhile
used to pasture his herds of cattle in Percote before the war broke
out; but when the ships of the Danaans came, he went back to Ilius,
where he was eminent among the Trojans, and lived near Priam who
treated him as one of his own sons. Hector now rebuked him and said,
"Why, Melanippus, are we thus remiss? do you take no note of the death
of your kinsman, and do you not see how they are trying to take
Dolops's armour? Follow me; there must be no fighting the Argives from
a distance now, but we must do so in close combat till either we kill
them or they take the high wall of Ilius and slay her people."

He led on as he spoke, and the hero Melanippus followed after.
Meanwhile Ajax son of Telamon was cheering on the Argives. "My
friends," he cried, "be men, and fear dishonour; quit yourselves in
battle so as to win respect from one another. Men who respect each
other's good opinion are less likely to be killed than those who do
not, but in flight there is neither gain nor glory."

Thus did he exhort men who were already bent upon driving back the
Trojans. They laid his words to heart and hedged the ships as with a
wall of bronze, while Jove urged on the Trojans. Menelaus of the loud
battle-cry urged Antilochus on. "Antilochus," said he, "you are young
and there is none of the Achaeans more fleet of foot or more valiant
than you are. See if you cannot spring upon some Trojan and kill him."

He hurried away when he had thus spurred Antilochus, who at once darted
out from the front ranks and aimed a spear, after looking carefully
round him. The Trojans fell back as he threw, and the dart did not
speed from his hand without effect, for it struck Melanippus the proud
son of Hiketaon in the breast by the nipple as he was coming forward,
and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the
ground. Antilochus sprang upon him as a dog springs on a fawn which a
hunter has hit as it was breaking away from its covert, and killed it.
Even so, O Melanippus, did stalwart Antilochus spring upon you to strip
you of your armour; but noble Hector marked him, and came running up to
him through the thick of the battle. Antilochus, brave soldier though
he was, would not stay to face him, but fled like some savage creature
which knows it has done wrong, and flies, when it has killed a dog or a
man who is herding his cattle, before a body of men can be gathered to
attack it. Even so did the son of Nestor fly, and the Trojans and
Hector with a cry that rent the air showered their weapons after him;
nor did he turn round and stay his flight till he had reached his
comrades.

The Trojans, fierce as lions, were still rushing on towards the ships
in fulfilment of the behests of Jove who kept spurring them on to new
deeds of daring, while he deadened the courage of the Argives and
defeated them by encouraging the Trojans. For he meant giving glory to
Hector son of Priam, and letting him throw fire upon the ships, till he
had fulfilled the unrighteous prayer that Thetis had made him; Jove,
therefore, bided his time till he should see the glare of a blazing
ship. From that hour he was about so to order that the Trojans should
be driven back from the ships and to vouchsafe glory to the Achaeans.
With this purpose he inspired Hector son of Priam, who was eager enough
already, to assail the ships. His fury was as that of Mars, or as when
a fire is raging in the glades of some dense forest upon the mountains;
he foamed at the mouth, his eyes glared under his terrible eye-brows,
and his helmet quivered on his temples by reason of the fury with which
he fought. Jove from heaven was with him, and though he was but one
against many, vouchsafed him victory and glory; for he was doomed to an
early death, and already Pallas Minerva was hurrying on the hour of his
destruction at the hands of the son of Peleus. Now, however, he kept
trying to break the ranks of the enemy wherever he could see them
thickest, and in the goodliest armour; but do what he might he could
not break through them, for they stood as a tower foursquare, or as
some high cliff rising from the grey sea that braves the anger of the
gale, and of the waves that thunder up against it. He fell upon them
like flames of fire from every quarter. As when a wave, raised mountain
high by wind and storm, breaks over a ship and covers it deep in foam,
the fierce winds roar against the mast, the hearts of the sailors fail
them for fear, and they are saved but by a very little from
destruction--even so were the hearts of the Achaeans fainting within
them. Or as a savage lion attacking a herd of cows while they are
feeding by thousands in the low-lying meadows by some wide-watered
shore--the herdsman is at his wit's end how to protect his herd and
keeps going about now in the van and now in the rear of his cattle,
while the lion springs into the thick of them and fastens on a cow so
that they all tremble for fear--even so were the Achaeans utterly
panic-stricken by Hector and father Jove. Nevertheless Hector only
killed Periphetes of Mycenae; he was son of Copreus who was wont to
take the orders of King Eurystheus to mighty Hercules, but the son was
a far better man than the father in every way; he was fleet of foot, a
valiant warrior, and in understanding ranked among the foremost men of
Mycenae. He it was who then afforded Hector a triumph, for as he was
turning back he stumbled against the rim of his shield which reached
his feet, and served to keep the javelins off him. He tripped against
this and fell face upward, his helmet ringing loudly about his head as
he did so. Hector saw him fall and ran up to him; he then thrust a
spear into his chest, and killed him close to his own comrades. These,
for all their sorrow, could not help him for they were themselves
terribly afraid of Hector.

They had now reached the ships and the prows of those that had been
drawn up first were on every side of them, but the Trojans came pouring
after them. The Argives were driven back from the first row of ships,
but they made a stand by their tents without being broken up and
scattered; shame and fear restrained them. They kept shouting
incessantly to one another, and Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to
the Achaeans, was loudest in imploring every man by his parents, and
beseeching him to stand firm.

"Be men, my friends," he cried, "and respect one another's good
opinion. Think, all of you, on your children, your wives, your
property, and your parents whether these be alive or dead. On their
behalf though they are not here, I implore you to stand firm, and not
to turn in flight."

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Minerva lifted
the thick veil of darkness from their eyes, and much light fell upon
them, alike on the side of the ships and on that where the fight was
raging. They could see Hector and all his men, both those in the rear
who were taking no part in the battle, and those who were fighting by
the ships.

Ajax could not bring himself to retreat along with the rest, but strode
from deck to deck with a great sea-pike in his hands twelve cubits long
and jointed with rings. As a man skilled in feats of horsemanship
couples four horses together and comes tearing full speed along the
public way from the country into some large town--many both men and
women marvel as they see him for he keeps all the time changing his
horse, springing from one to another without ever missing his feet
while the horses are at a gallop--even so did Ajax go striding from one
ship's deck to another, and his voice went up into the heavens. He kept
on shouting his orders to the Danaans and exhorting them to defend
their ships and tents; neither did Hector remain within the main body
of the Trojan warriors, but as a dun eagle swoops down upon a flock of
wild-fowl feeding near a river--geese, it may be, or cranes, or
long-necked swans--even so did Hector make straight for a dark-prowed
ship, rushing right towards it; for Jove with his mighty hand impelled
him forward, and roused his people to follow him.

And now the battle again raged furiously at the ships. You would have
thought the men were coming on fresh and unwearied, so fiercely did
they fight; and this was the mind in which they were--the Achaeans did
not believe they should escape destruction but thought themselves
doomed, while there was not a Trojan but his heart beat high with the
hope of firing the ships and putting the Achaean heroes to the sword.

Thus were the two sides minded. Then Hector seized the stern of the
good ship that had brought Protesilaus to Troy, but never bore him back
to his native land. Round this ship there raged a close hand-to-hand
fight between Danaans and Trojans. They did not fight at a distance
with bows and javelins, but with one mind hacked at one another in
close combat with their mighty swords and spears pointed at both ends;
they fought moreover with keen battle-axes and with hatchets. Many a
good stout blade hilted and scabbarded with iron, fell from hand or
shoulder as they fought, and the earth ran red with blood. Hector, when
he had seized the ship, would not loose his hold but held on to its
curved stern and shouted to the Trojans, "Bring fire, and raise the
battle-cry all of you with a single voice. Now has Jove vouchsafed us a
day that will pay us for all the rest; this day we shall take the ships
which came hither against heaven's will, and which have caused us such
infinite suffering through the cowardice of our councillors, who when I
would have done battle at the ships held me back and forbade the host
to follow me; if Jove did then indeed warp our judgements, himself now
commands me and cheers me on."

As he spoke thus the Trojans sprang yet more fiercely on the Achaeans,
and Ajax no longer held his ground, for he was overcome by the darts
that were flung at him, and made sure that he was doomed. Therefore he
left the raised deck at the stern, and stepped back on to the
seven-foot bench of the oarsmen. Here he stood on the look-out, and
with his spear held back any Trojan whom he saw bringing fire to the
ships. All the time he kept on shouting at the top of his voice and
exhorting the Danaans. "My friends," he cried, "Danaan heroes, servants
of Mars, be men my friends, and fight with might and with main. Can we
hope to find helpers hereafter, or a wall to shield us more surely than
the one we have? There is no strong city within reach, whence we may
draw fresh forces to turn the scales in our favour. We are on the plain
of the armed Trojans with the sea behind us, and far from our own
country. Our salvation, therefore, is in the might of our hands and in
hard fighting."

As he spoke he wielded his spear with still greater fury, and when any
Trojan made towards the ships with fire at Hector's bidding, he would
be on the look-out for him, and drive at him with his long spear.
Twelve men did he thus kill in hand-to-hand fight before the ships.
