BOOK IX

  The Embassy to Achilles.

THUS did the Trojans watch. But Panic, comrade of blood-stained Rout,
had taken fast hold of the Achaeans, and their princes were all of them
in despair. As when the two winds that blow from Thrace--the north and
the northwest--spring up of a sudden and rouse the fury of the main--in
a moment the dark waves uprear their heads and scatter their sea-wrack
in all directions--even thus troubled were the hearts of the Achaeans.

The son of Atreus in dismay bade the heralds call the people to a
council man by man, but not to cry the matter aloud; he made haste also
himself to call them, and they sat sorry at heart in their assembly.
Agamemnon shed tears as it were a running stream or cataract on the
side of some sheer cliff; and thus, with many a heavy sigh he spoke to
the Achaeans. "My friends," said he, "princes and councillors of the
Argives, the hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me. Cruel Jove
gave me his solemn promise that I should sack the city of Troy before
returning, but he has played me false, and is now bidding me go
ingloriously back to Argos with the loss of much people. Such is the
will of Jove, who has laid many a proud city in the dust as he will yet
lay others, for his power is above all. Now, therefore, let us all do
as I say and sail back to our own country, for we shall not take Troy."

Thus he spoke, and the sons of the Achaeans for a long while sat
sorrowful there, but they all held their peace, till at last Diomed of
the loud battle-cry made answer saying, "Son of Atreus, I will chide
your folly, as is my right in council. Be not then aggrieved that I
should do so. In the first place you attacked me before all the Danaans
and said that I was a coward and no soldier. The Argives young and old
know that you did so. But the son of scheming Saturn endowed you by
halves only. He gave you honour as the chief ruler over us, but valour,
which is the highest both right and might he did not give you. Sir,
think you that the sons of the Achaeans are indeed as unwarlike and
cowardly as you say they are? If your own mind is set upon going
home--go--the way is open to you; the many ships that followed you from
Mycene stand ranged upon the seashore; but the rest of us stay here
till we have sacked Troy. Nay though these too should turn homeward
with their ships, Sthenelus and myself will still fight on till we
reach the goal of Ilius, for heaven was with us when we came."

The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words of Diomed, and
presently Nestor rose to speak. "Son of Tydeus," said he, "in war your
prowess is beyond question, and in council you excel all who are of
your own years; no one of the Achaeans can make light of what you say
nor gainsay it, but you have not yet come to the end of the whole
matter. You are still young--you might be the youngest of my own
children--still you have spoken wisely and have counselled the chief of
the Achaeans not without discretion; nevertheless I am older than you
and I will tell you everything; therefore let no man, not even King
Agamemnon, disregard my saying, for he that foments civil discord is a
clanless, hearthless outlaw.

"Now, however, let us obey the behests of night and get our suppers,
but let the sentinels every man of them camp by the trench that is
without the wall. I am giving these instructions to the young men; when
they have been attended to, do you, son of Atreus, give your orders,
for you are the most royal among us all. Prepare a feast for your
councillors; it is right and reasonable that you should do so; there is
abundance of wine in your tents, which the ships of the Achaeans bring
from Thrace daily. You have everything at your disposal wherewith to
entertain guests, and you have many subjects. When many are got
together, you can be guided by him whose counsel is wisest--and sorely
do we need shrewd and prudent counsel, for the foe has lit his
watchfires hard by our ships. Who can be other than dismayed? This
night will either be the ruin of our host, or save it."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. The sentinels went
out in their armour under command of Nestor's son Thrasymedes, a
captain of the host, and of the bold warriors Ascalaphus and Ialmenus:
there were also Meriones, Aphareus and Deipyrus, and the son of Creion,
noble Lycomedes. There were seven captains of the sentinels, and with
each there went a hundred youths armed with long spears: they took
their places midway between the trench and the wall, and when they had
done so they lit their fires and got every man his supper.

The son of Atreus then bade many councillors of the Achaeans to his
quarters and prepared a great feast in their honour. They laid their hands
on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had
enough to eat and drink, old Nestor, whose counsel was ever truest, was
the first to lay his mind before them. He, therefore, with all
sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus.

"With yourself, most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, will
I both begin my speech and end it, for you are king over much people.
Jove, moreover, has vouchsafed you to wield the sceptre and to uphold
righteousness, that you may take thought for your people under you;
therefore it behooves you above all others both to speak and to give
ear, and to out the counsel of another who shall have been minded to
speak wisely. All turns on you and on your commands, therefore I will
say what I think will be best. No man will be of a truer mind than that
which has been mine from the hour when you, sir, angered Achilles by
taking the girl Briseis from his tent against my judgment. I urged you
not to do so, but you yielded to your own pride, and dishonoured a hero
whom heaven itself had honoured--for you still hold the prize that had
been awarded to him. Now, however, let us think how we may appease him,
both with presents and fair speeches that may conciliate him."

And King Agamemnon answered, "Sir, you have reproved my folly justly. I
was wrong. I own it. One whom heaven befriends is in himself a host,
and Jove has shown that he befriends this man by destroying much people
of the Achaeans. I was blinded with passion and yielded to my worser
mind; therefore I will make amends, and will give him great gifts by
way of atonement. I will tell them in the presence of you all. I will
give him seven tripods that have never yet been on the fire, and ten
talents of gold. I will give him twenty iron cauldrons and twelve
strong horses that have won races and carried off prizes. Rich, indeed,
both in land and gold is he that has as many prizes as my horses have
won me. I will give him seven excellent workwomen, Lesbians, whom I
chose for myself when he took Lesbos--all of surpassing beauty. I will
give him these, and with them her whom I erewhile took from him, the
daughter of Briseus; and I swear a great oath that I never went up into
her couch, nor have been with her after the manner of men and women.

"All these things will I give him now, and if hereafter the gods
vouchsafe me to sack the city of Priam, let him come when we Achaeans
are dividing the spoil, and load his ship with gold and bronze to his
liking; furthermore let him take twenty Trojan women, the loveliest
after Helen herself. Then, when we reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest of
all lands, he shall be my son-in-law and I will show him like honour
with my own dear son Orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. I
have three daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa, let him
take the one of his choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the
house of Peleus; I will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave
his daughter, and will give him seven well established cities,
Cardamyle, Enope, and Hire, where there is grass; holy Pherae and the
rich meadows of Anthea; Aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of
Pedasus, all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy Pylos. The men
that dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour him
with gifts as though he were a god, and be obedient to his comfortable
ordinances. All this will I do if he will now forgo his anger. Let him
then yield; it is only Hades who is utterly ruthless and
unyielding--and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to
mankind. Moreover I am older and more royal than himself. Therefore,
let him now obey me."

Then Nestor answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men,
Agamemnon. The gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then send
chosen messengers, who may go to the tent of Achilles son of Peleus
without delay. Let those go whom I shall name. Let Phoenix, dear to
Jove, lead the way; let Ajax and Ulysses follow, and let the heralds
Odius and Eurybates go with them. Now bring water for our hands, and
bid all keep silence while we pray to Jove the son of Saturn, if so be
that he may have mercy upon us."

Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. Men-servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the
mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering; then, when they had made their offerings,
and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the envoys set out from
the tent of Agamemnon son of Atreus; and Nestor, looking first to one
and then to another, but most especially at Ulysses, was instant with
them that they should prevail with the noble son of Peleus.

They went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed
earnestly to earth-encircling Neptune that the high spirit of the son
of Aeacus might incline favourably towards them. When they reached the
ships and tents of the Myrmidons, they found Achilles playing on a
lyre, fair, of cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. It
was part of the spoils which he had taken when he sacked the city of
Eetion, and he was now diverting himself with it and singing the feats
of heroes. He was alone with Patroclus, who sat opposite to him and
said nothing, waiting till he should cease singing. Ulysses and Ajax
now came in--Ulysses leading the way--and stood before him. Achilles
sprang from his seat with the lyre still in his hand, and Patroclus,
when he saw the strangers, rose also. Achilles then greeted them
saying, "All hail and welcome--you must come upon some great matter,
you, who for all my anger are still dearest to me of the Achaeans."

With this he led them forward, and bade them sit on seats covered with
purple rugs; then he said to Patroclus who was close by him, "Son of
Menoetius, set a larger bowl upon the table, mix less water with the
wine, and give every man his cup, for these are very dear friends, who
are now under my roof."

Patroclus did as his comrade bade him; he set the chopping-block in
front of the fire, and on it he laid the loin of a sheep, the loin also
of a goat, and the chine of a fat hog. Automedon held the meat while
Achilles chopped it; he then sliced the pieces and put them on spits
while the son of Menoetius made the fire burn high. When the flame had
died down, he spread the embers, laid the spits on top of them, lifting
them up and setting them upon the spit-racks; and he sprinkled them
with salt. When the meat was roasted, he set it on platters, and handed
bread round the table in fair baskets, while Achilles dealt them their
portions. Then Achilles took his seat facing Ulysses against the
opposite wall, and bade his comrade Patroclus offer sacrifice to the
gods; so he cast the offerings into the fire, and they laid their hands
upon the good things that were before them. As soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink, Ajax made a sign to Phoenix, and when he saw
this, Ulysses filled his cup with wine and pledged Achilles.

"Hail," said he, "Achilles, we have had no scant of good cheer, neither
in the tent of Agamemnon, nor yet here; there has been plenty to eat
and drink, but our thought turns upon no such matter. Sir, we are in
the face of great disaster, and without your help know not whether we
shall save our fleet or lose it. The Trojans and their allies have
camped hard by our ships and by the wall; they have lit watchfires
throughout their host and deem that nothing can now prevent them from
falling on our fleet. Jove, moreover, has sent his lightnings on their
right; Hector, in all his glory, rages like a maniac; confident that
Jove is with him he fears neither god nor man, but is gone raving mad,
and prays for the approach of day. He vows that he will hew the high
sterns of our ships in pieces, set fire to their hulls, and make havoc
of the Achaeans while they are dazed and smothered in smoke; I much
fear that heaven will make good his boasting, and it will prove our lot
to perish at Troy far from our home in Argos. Up, then, and late though
it be, save the sons of the Achaeans who faint before the fury of the
Trojans. You will repent bitterly hereafter if you do not, for when the
harm is done there will be no curing it; consider ere it be too late,
and save the Danaans from destruction.

"My good friend, when your father Peleus sent you from Phthia to
Agamemnon, did he not charge you saying, 'Son, Minerva and Juno will
make you strong if they choose, but check your high temper, for the
better part is in goodwill. Eschew vain quarrelling, and the Achaeans
old and young will respect you more for doing so.' These were his
words, but you have forgotten them. Even now, however, be appeased, and
put away your anger from you. Agamemnon will make you great amends if
you will forgive him; listen, and I will tell you what he has said in
his tent that he will give you. He will give you seven tripods that
have never yet been on the fire, and ten talents of gold; twenty iron
cauldrons, and twelve strong horses that have won races and carried off
prizes. Rich indeed both in land and gold is he who has as many prizes
as these horses have won for Agamemnon. Moreover he will give you seven
excellent workwomen, Lesbians, whom he chose for himself, when you took
Lesbos--all of surpassing beauty. He will give you these, and with them
her whom he erewhile took from you, the daughter of Briseus, and he
will swear a great oath, he has never gone up into her couch nor been
with her after the manner of men and women. All these things will he
give you now down, and if hereafter the gods vouchsafe him to sack the
city of Priam, you can come when we Achaeans are dividing the spoil,
and load your ship with gold and bronze to your liking. You can take
twenty Trojan women, the loveliest after Helen herself. Then, when we
reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest of all lands, you shall be his
son-in-law, and he will show you like honour with his own dear son
Orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. Agamemnon has three
daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa; you may take the one
of your choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of
Peleus; he will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his
daughter, and will give you seven well-established cities, Cardamyle,
Enope, and Hire where there is grass; holy Pheras and the rich meadows
of Anthea; Aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of Pedasus, all near
the sea, and on the borders of sandy Pylos. The men that dwell there
are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour you with gifts as though
were a god, and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances. All this
will he do if you will now forgo your anger. Moreover, though you hate
both him and his gifts with all your heart, yet pity the rest of the
Achaeans who are being harassed in all their host; they will honour you
as a god, and you will earn great glory at their hands. You might even
kill Hector; he will come within your reach, for he is infatuated, and
declares that not a Danaan whom the ships have brought can hold his own
against him."

Achilles answered, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, I should give you
formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there be no
more of this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come. Him do I
hate even as the gates of hell who says one thing while he hides
another in his heart; therefore I will say what I mean. I will be
appeased neither by Agamemnon son of Atreus nor by any other of the
Danaans, for I see that I have no thanks for all my fighting. He that
fights fares no better than he that does not; coward and hero are held
in equal honour, and death deals like measure to him who works and him
who is idle. I have taken nothing by all my hardships--with my life
ever in my hand; as a bird when she has found a morsel takes it to her
nestlings, and herself fares hardly, even so many a long night have I
been wakeful, and many a bloody battle have I waged by day against
those who were fighting for their women. With my ships I have taken
twelve cities, and eleven round about Troy have I stormed with my men
by land; I took great store of wealth from every one of them, but I
gave all up to Agamemnon son of Atreus. He stayed where he was by his
ships, yet of what came to him he gave little, and kept much himself.

"Nevertheless he did distribute some meeds of honour among the
chieftains and kings, and these have them still; from me alone of the
Achaeans did he take the woman in whom I delighted--let him keep her
and sleep with her. Why, pray, must the Argives needs fight the
Trojans? What made the son of Atreus gather the host and bring them?
Was it not for the sake of Helen? Are the sons of Atreus the only men
in the world who love their wives? Any man of common right feeling will
love and cherish her who is his own, as I this woman, with my whole
heart, though she was but a fruitling of my spear. Agamemnon has taken
her from me; he has played me false; I know him; let him tempt me no
further, for he shall not move me. Let him look to you, Ulysses, and to
the other princes to save his ships from burning. He has done much
without me already. He has built a wall; he has dug a trench deep and
wide all round it, and he has planted it within with stakes; but even
so he stays not the murderous might of Hector. So long as I fought the
Achaeans Hector suffered not the battle range far from the city walls;
he would come to the Scaean gates and to the oak tree, but no further.
Once he stayed to meet me and hardly did he escape my onset: now,
however, since I am in no mood to fight him, I will to-morrow offer
sacrifice to Jove and to all the gods; I will draw my ships into the
water and then victual them duly; to-morrow morning, if you care to
look, you will see my ships on the Hellespont, and my men rowing out to
sea with might and main. If great Neptune vouchsafes me a fair passage,
in three days I shall be in Phthia. I have much there that I left
behind me when I came here to my sorrow, and I shall bring back still
further store of gold, of red copper, of fair women, and of iron, my
share of the spoils that we have taken; but one prize, he who gave has
insolently taken away. Tell him all as I now bid you, and tell him in
public that the Achaeans may hate him and beware of him should he think
that he can yet dupe others for his effrontery never fails him.

"As for me, hound that he is, he dares not look me in the face. I will
take no counsel with him, and will undertake nothing in common with
him. He has wronged me and deceived me enough, he shall not cozen me
further; let him go his own way, for Jove has robbed him of his reason.
I loathe his presents, and for himself care not one straw. He may offer
me ten or even twenty times what he has now done, nay--not though it be
all that he has in the world, both now or ever shall have; he may
promise me the wealth of Orchomenus or of Egyptian Thebes, which is the
richest city in the whole world, for it has a hundred gates through
each of which two hundred men may drive at once with their chariots and
horses; he may offer me gifts as the sands of the sea or the dust of
the plain in multitude, but even so he shall not move me till I have
been revenged in full for the bitter wrong he has done me. I will not
marry his daughter; she may be fair as Venus, and skilful as Minerva,
but I will have none of her: let another take her, who may be a good
match for her and who rules a larger kingdom. If the gods spare me to
return home, Peleus will find me a wife; there are Achaean women in
Hellas and Phthia, daughters of kings that have cities under them; of
these I can take whom I will and marry her. Many a time was I minded
when at home in Phthia to woo and wed a woman who would make me a
suitable wife, and to enjoy the riches of my old father Peleus. My life
is more to me than all the wealth of Ilius while it was yet at peace
before the Achaeans went there, or than all the treasure that lies on
the stone floor of Apollo's temple beneath the cliffs of Pytho. Cattle
and sheep are to be had for harrying, and a man buy both tripods and
horses if he wants them, but when his life has once left him it can
neither be bought nor harried back again.

"My mother Thetis tells me that there are two ways in which I may meet
my end. If I stay here and fight, I shall not return alive but my name
will live for ever: whereas if I go home my name will die, but it will
be long ere death shall take me. To the rest of you, then, I say, 'Go
home, for you will not take Ilius.' Jove has held his hand over her to
protect her, and her people have taken heart. Go, therefore, as in duty
bound, and tell the princes of the Achaeans the message that I have
sent them; tell them to find some other plan for the saving of their
ships and people, for so long as my displeasure lasts the one that they
have now hit upon may not be. As for Phoenix, let him sleep here that
he may sail with me in the morning if he so will. But I will not take
him by force."

They all held their peace, dismayed at the sternness with which he had
denied them, till presently the old knight Phoenix in his great fear
for the ships of the Achaeans, burst into tears and said, "Noble
Achilles, if you are now minded to return, and in the fierceness of
your anger will do nothing to save the ships from burning, how, my son,
can I remain here without you? Your father Peleus bade me go with you
when he sent you as a mere lad from Phthia to Agamemnon. You knew
nothing neither of war nor of the arts whereby men make their mark in
council, and he sent me with you to train you in all excellence of
speech and action. Therefore, my son, I will not stay here without
you--no, not though heaven itself vouchsafe to strip my years from off
me, and make me young as I was when I first left Hellas the land of
fair women. I was then flying the anger of father Amyntor, son of
Ormenus, who was furious with me in the matter of his concubine, of
whom he was enamoured to the wronging of his wife my mother. My mother,
therefore, prayed me without ceasing to lie with the woman myself, that
so she hate my father, and in the course of time I yielded. But my
father soon came to know, and cursed me bitterly, calling the dread
Erinyes to witness. He prayed that no son of mine might ever sit upon
knees--and the gods, Jove of the world below and awful Proserpine,
fulfilled his curse. I took counsel to kill him, but some god stayed my
rashness and bade me think on men's evil tongues and how I should be
branded as the murderer of my father; nevertheless I could not bear to
stay in my father's house with him so bitter against me. My cousins
and clansmen came about me, and pressed me sorely to remain; many a
sheep and many an ox did they slaughter, and many a fat hog did they
set down to roast before the fire; many a jar, too, did they broach of
my father's wine. Nine whole nights did they set a guard over me taking
it in turns to watch, and they kept a fire always burning, both in the
cloister of the outer court and in the inner court at the doors of the
room wherein I lay; but when the darkness of the tenth night came, I
broke through the closed doors of my room, and climbed the wall of the
outer court after passing quickly and unperceived through the men on
guard and the women servants. I then fled through Hellas till I came to
fertile Phthia, mother of sheep, and to King Peleus, who made me
welcome and treated me as a father treats an only son who will be heir
to all his wealth. He made me rich and set me over much people,
establishing me on the borders of Phthia where I was chief ruler over
the Dolopians.

"It was I, Achilles, who had the making of you; I loved you with all my
heart: for you would eat neither at home nor when you had gone out
elsewhere, till I had first set you upon my knees, cut up the dainty
morsel that you were to eat, and held the wine-cup to your lips. Many a
time have you slobbered your wine in baby helplessness over my shirt; I
had infinite trouble with you, but I knew that heaven had vouchsafed me
no offspring of my own, and I made a son of you, Achilles, that in my
hour of need you might protect me. Now, therefore, I say battle with
your pride and beat it; cherish not your anger for ever; the might and
majesty of heaven are more than ours, but even heaven may be appeased;
and if a man has sinned he prays the gods, and reconciles them to
himself by his piteous cries and by frankincense, with drink-offerings
and the savour of burnt sacrifice. For prayers are as daughters to
great Jove; halt, wrinkled, with eyes askance, they follow in the
footsteps of sin, who, being fierce and fleet of foot, leaves them far
behind him, and ever baneful to mankind outstrips them even to the ends
of the world; but nevertheless the prayers come hobbling and healing
after. If a man has pity upon these daughters of Jove when they draw
near him, they will bless him and hear him too when he is praying; but
if he deny them and will not listen to them, they go to Jove the son of
Saturn and pray that he may presently fall into sin--to his ruing
bitterly hereafter. Therefore, Achilles, give these daughters of Jove
due reverence, and bow before them as all good men will bow. Were not
the son of Atreus offering you gifts and promising others later--if he
were still furious and implacable--I am not he that would bid you throw
off your anger and help the Achaeans, no matter how great their need;
but he is giving much now, and more hereafter; he has sent his captains
to urge his suit, and has chosen those who of all the Argives are most
acceptable to you; make not then their words and their coming to be of
none effect. Your anger has been righteous so far. We have heard in
song how heroes of old time quarrelled when they were roused to fury,
but still they could be won by gifts, and fair words could soothe them.

"I have an old story in my mind--a very old one--but you are all
friends and I will tell it. The Curetes and the Aetolians were fighting
and killing one another round Calydon--the Aetolians defending the city
and the Curetes trying to destroy it. For Diana of the golden throne
was angry and did them hurt because Oeneus had not offered her his
harvest first-fruits. The other gods had all been feasted with
hecatombs, but to the daughter of great Jove alone he had made no
sacrifice. He had forgotten her, or somehow or other it had escaped
him, and this was a grievous sin. Thereon the archer goddess in her
displeasure sent a prodigious creature against him--a savage wild boar
with great white tusks that did much harm to his orchard lands,
uprooting apple-trees in full bloom and throwing them to the ground.
But Meleager son of Oeneus got huntsmen and hounds from many cities and
killed it--for it was so monstrous that not a few were needed, and many
a man did it stretch upon his funeral pyre. On this the goddess set the
Curetes and the Aetolians fighting furiously about the head and skin of
the boar.

"So long as Meleager was in the field things went badly with the
Curetes, and for all their numbers they could not hold their ground
under the city walls; but in the course of time Meleager was angered as
even a wise man will sometimes be. He was incensed with his mother
Althaea, and therefore stayed at home with his wedded wife fair
Cleopatra, who was daughter of Marpessa daughter of Euenus, and of Ides
the man then living. He it was who took his bow and faced King Apollo
himself for fair Marpessa's sake; her father and mother then named her
Alcyone, because her mother had mourned with the plaintive strains of
the halcyon-bird when Phoebus Apollo had carried her off. Meleager,
then, stayed at home with Cleopatra, nursing the anger which he felt by
reason of his mother's curses. His mother, grieving for the death of
her brother, prayed the gods, and beat the earth with her hands,
calling upon Hades and on awful Proserpine; she went down upon her
knees and her bosom was wet with tears as she prayed that they would
kill her son--and Erinys that walks in darkness and knows no ruth heard
her from Erebus.

"Then was heard the din of battle about the gates of Calydon, and the
dull thump of the battering against their walls. Thereon the elders of
the Aetolians besought Meleager; they sent the chiefest of their
priests, and begged him to come out and help them, promising him a
great reward. They bade him choose fifty plough-gates, the most fertile
in the plain of Calydon, the one-half vineyard and the other open
plough-land. The old warrior Oeneus implored him, standing at the
threshold of his room and beating the doors in supplication. His
sisters and his mother herself besought him sore, but he the more
refused them; those of his comrades who were nearest and dearest to him
also prayed him, but they could not move him till the foe was battering
at the very doors of his chamber, and the Curetes had scaled the walls
and were setting fire to the city. Then at last his sorrowing wife
detailed the horrors that befall those whose city is taken; she
reminded him how the men are slain, and the city is given over to the
flames, while the women and children are carried into captivity; when
he heard all this, his heart was touched, and he donned his armour to
go forth. Thus of his own inward motion he saved the city of the
Aetolians; but they now gave him nothing of those rich rewards that
they had offered earlier, and though he saved the city he took nothing
by it. Be not then, my son, thus minded; let not heaven lure you into
any such course. When the ships are burning it will be a harder matter
to save them. Take the gifts, and go, for the Achaeans will then honour
you as a god; whereas if you fight without taking them, you may beat
the battle back, but you will not be held in like honour."

And Achilles answered, "Phoenix, old friend and father, I have no need
of such honour. I have honour from Jove himself, which will abide with
me at my ships while I have breath in my body, and my limbs are strong.
I say further--and lay my saying to your heart--vex me no more with
this weeping and lamentation, all in the cause of the son of Atreus.
Love him so well, and you may lose the love I bear you. You ought to
help me rather in troubling those that trouble me; be king as much as I
am, and share like honour with myself; the others shall take my answer;
stay here yourself and sleep comfortably in your bed; at daybreak we
will consider whether to remain or go."

On this he nodded quietly to Patroclus as a sign that he was to prepare
a bed for Phoenix, and that the others should take their leave. Ajax
son of Telamon then said, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, let us be
gone, for I see that our journey is vain. We must now take our answer,
unwelcome though it be, to the Danaans who are waiting to receive it.
Achilles is savage and remorseless; he is cruel, and cares nothing for
the love his comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others. He
is implacable--and yet if a man's brother or son has been slain he will
accept a fine by way of amends from him that killed him, and the
wrong-doer having paid in full remains in peace among his own people;
but as for you, Achilles, the gods have put a wicked unforgiving spirit
in your heart, and this, all about one single girl, whereas we now
offer you the seven best we have, and much else into the bargain. Be
then of a more gracious mind, respect the hospitality of your own roof.
We are with you as messengers from the host of the Danaans, and would
fain he held nearest and dearest to yourself of all the Achaeans."

"Ajax," replied Achilles, "noble son of Telamon, you have spoken much
to my liking, but my blood boils when I think it all over, and remember
how the son of Atreus treated me with contumely as though I were some
vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the Argives. Go, then, and
deliver your message; say that I will have no concern with fighting
till Hector, son of noble Priam, reaches the tents of the Myrmidons in
his murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. For all his
lust of battle, I take it he will be held in check when he is at my own
tent and ship."

On this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings,
and went back to the ships, Ulysses leading the way. But Patroclus told
his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed for
Phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of
fine linen. The old man then laid himself down and waited till morning
came. But Achilles slept in an inner room, and beside him the daughter
of Phorbas lovely Diomede, whom he had carried off from Lesbos.
Patroclus lay on the other side of the room, and with him fair Iphis
whom Achilles had given him when he took Scyros the city of Enyeus.

When the envoys reached the tents of the son of Atreus, the Achaeans
rose, pledged them in cups of gold, and began to question them. King
Agamemnon was the first to do so. "Tell me, Ulysses," said he, "will he
save the ships from burning, or did he refuse, and is he still furious?"

Ulysses answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon,
Achilles will not be calmed, but is more fiercely angry than ever, and
spurns both you and your gifts. He bids you take counsel with the
Achaeans to save the ships and host as you best may; as for himself, he
said that at daybreak he should draw his ships into the water. He said
further that he should advise every one to sail home likewise, for that
you will not reach the goal of Ilius. 'Jove,' he said, 'has laid his
hand over the city to protect it, and the people have taken heart.'
This is what he said, and the others who were with me can tell you the
same story--Ajax and the two heralds, men, both of them, who may be
trusted. The old man Phoenix stayed where he was to sleep, for so
Achilles would have it, that he might go home with him in the morning
if he so would; but he will not take him by force."

They all held their peace, sitting for a long time silent and dejected,
by reason of the sternness with which Achilles had refused them, till
presently Diomed said, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men,
Agamemnon, you ought not to have sued the son of Peleus nor offered him
gifts. He is proud enough as it is, and you have encouraged him in his
pride still further. Let him stay or go as he will. He will fight later
when he is in the humour, and heaven puts it in his mind to do so. Now,
therefore, let us all do as I say; we have eaten and drunk our fill,
let us then take our rest, for in rest there is both strength and stay.
But when fair rosy-fingered morn appears, forthwith bring out your host
and your horsemen in front of the ships, urging them on, and yourself
fighting among the foremost."

Thus he spoke, and the other chieftains approved his words. They then
made their drink-offerings and went every man to his own tent, where
they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.
