Book XIV

ULYSSES IN THE HUT WITH EUMAEUS.

Ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the
wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till he reached the
place where Minerva had said that he would find the swineherd, who was
the most thrifty servant he had. He found him sitting in front of his
hut, which was by the yards that he had built on a site which could be
seen from far. He had made them spacious {126} and fair to see, with
a free run for the pigs all round them; he had built them during his
master's absence, of stones which he had gathered out of the ground,
without saying anything to Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced them
on top with thorn bushes. Outside the yard he had run a strong fence of
oaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside he had
built twelve styes near one another for the sows to lie in. There were
fifty pigs wallowing in each stye, all of them breeding sows; but the
boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the suitors
kept on eating them, and the swineherd had to send them the best he
had continually. There were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and the
herdsman's four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept always
with them. The swineherd was at that moment cutting out a pair of
sandals {127} from a good stout ox hide. Three of his men were out
herding the pigs in one place or another, and he had sent the fourth to
town with a boar that he had been forced to send the suitors that they
might sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.

When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew at
him, but Ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of
the stick that he had in his hand: still, he would have been torn by
them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide,
rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs off
by shouting and throwing stones at them. Then he said to Ulysses, "Old
man, the dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then you
would have got me into trouble. The gods have given me quite enough
worries without that, for I have lost the best of masters, and am in
continual grief on his account. I have to attend swine for other people
to eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the light of day, is starving
in some distant land. But come inside, and when you have had your fill
of bread and wine, tell me where you come from, and all about your
misfortunes."

On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down.
He strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of
this he threw the shaggy chamois skin--a great thick one--on which he
used to sleep by night. Ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome,
and said "May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your heart's
desire in return for the kind way in which you have received me."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Stranger, though a still
poorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult him,
for all strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take what you
can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have young
lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for heaven has
hindered the return of him who would have been always good to me and
given me something of my own--a house, a piece of land, a good looking
wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant who has worked
hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as they have mine
in the situation which I hold. If my master had grown old here he would
have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I wish that Helen's
whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been the death of many a
good man. It was this matter that took my master to Ilius, the land of
noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause of king Agamemnon."

As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where
the young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought
back with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted
them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it before
Ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over
with white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl of
ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin.

"Fall to, stranger," said he, "on a dish of servant's pork. The fat pigs
have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or scruple; but
the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and respect those who do
what is lawful and right. Even the fierce freebooters who go raiding on
other people's land, and Jove gives them their spoil--even they,
when they have filled their ships and got home again live
conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but some god
seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone; they
will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their offers of
marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force, without fear
or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they sacrifice not
one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his wine, for he was
exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithaca or on the mainland
is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men put together. I will
tell you what he had. There are twelve herds of cattle upon the main
land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also twelve droves of pigs,
while his own men and hired strangers feed him twelve widely spreading
herds of goats. Here in Ithaca he runs even large flocks of goats on
the far end of the island, and they are in the charge of excellent goat
herds. Each one of these sends the suitors the best goat in the flock
every day. As for myself, I am in charge of the pigs that you see here,
and I have to keep picking out the best I have and sending it to them."

This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously
without a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and was
satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank,
filled it with wine, and gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and said
as he took it in his hands, "My friend, who was this master of yours
that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell
me? You say he perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell me who he
was, in case I may have met with such a person. Jove and the other gods
know, but I may be able to give you news of him, for I have travelled
much."

Eumaeus answered, "Old man, no traveller who comes here with news will
get Ulysses' wife and son to believe his story. Nevertheless, tramps in
want of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a
word of truth; every one who finds his way to Ithaca goes to my mistress
and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes much of them,
and asks them all manner of questions, crying all the time as women will
when they have lost their husbands. And you too, old man, for a shirt
and a cloak would doubtless make up a very pretty story. But the wolves
and birds of prey have long since torn Ulysses to pieces, or the fishes
of the sea have eaten him, and his bones are lying buried deep in sand
upon some foreign shore; he is dead and gone, and a bad business it is
for all his friends--for me especially; go where I may I shall never
find so good a master, not even if I were to go home to my mother and
father where I was bred and born. I do not so much care, however, about
my parents now, though I should dearly like to see them again in my own
country; it is the loss of Ulysses that grieves me most; I cannot speak
of him without reverence though he is here no longer, for he was very
fond of me, and took such care of me that wherever he may be I shall
always honour his memory."

"My friend," replied Ulysses, "you are very positive, and very hard of
belief about your master's coming home again, nevertheless I will not
merely say, but will swear, that he is coming. Do not give me anything
for my news till he has actually come, you may then give me a shirt and
cloak of good wear if you will. I am in great want, but I will not take
anything at all till then, for I hate a man, even as I hate hell fire,
who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. I swear by king Jove, by the
rites of hospitality, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I have now
come, that all will surely happen as I have said it will. Ulysses
will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the
beginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance on all those who
are ill treating his wife and son."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Old man, you will neither
get paid for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home; drink
your wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. Do not keep on
reminding me of all this; it always pains me when any one speaks about
my honoured master. As for your oath we will let it alone, but I only
wish he may come, as do Penelope, his old father Laertes, and his son
Telemachus. I am terribly unhappy too about this same boy of his; he was
running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be no worse man, face
and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or man, has been
unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to Pylos to try and get news of
his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as he is coming
home, in the hope of leaving the house of Arceisius without a name in
Ithaca. But let us say no more about him, and leave him to be taken, or
else to escape if the son of Saturn holds his hand over him to protect
him. And now, old man, tell me your own story; tell me also, for I want
to know, who you are and where you come from. Tell me of your town
and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how crew brought you to
Ithaca, and from what country they professed to come--for you cannot
have come by land."

And Ulysses answered, "I will tell you all about it. If there were meat
and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do
but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, I could easily
talk on for a whole twelve months without ever finishing the story of
the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.

"I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well to do man, who had many
sons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he had
purchased for a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax
(whose lineage I claim, and who was held in the highest honour among the
Cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put me
on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock. When,
however, death took him to the house of Hades, his sons divided his
estate and cast lots for their shares, but to me they gave a holding
and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled me to marry into a rich
family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on the field of
battle. It is all over now; still, if you look at the straw you can see
what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and to spare. Mars and
Minerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked my men to surprise the
enemy with an ambuscade I never gave death so much as a thought, but was
the first to leap forward and spear all whom I could overtake. Such was
I in battle, but I did not care about farm work, nor the frugal home
life of those who would bring up children. My delight was in ships,
fighting, javelins, and arrows--things that most men shudder to think
of; but one man likes one thing and another another, and this was what
I was most naturally inclined to. Before the Achaeans went to Troy,
nine times was I in command of men and ships on foreign service, and I
amassed much wealth. I had my pick of the spoil in the first instance,
and much more was allotted to me later on.

"My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans,
but when Jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many
perished, the people required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to
Troy, and there was no way out of it, for they insisted on our doing
so. There we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked the
city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. Then it was
that Jove devised evil against me. I spent but one month happily with my
children, wife, and property, and then I conceived the idea of making a
descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned it. I had nine
ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six days I and my men
made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrifice to the gods
and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board and set sail
from Crete with a fair North wind behind us though we were going down a
river. Nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had no sickness
on board, but sat where we were and let the ships go as the wind and
steersmen took them. On the fifth day we reached the river Aegyptus;
there I stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stay by them and
keep guard over them while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every
point of vantage.

"But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged
the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and
children captive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they
heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was
filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam of armour.
Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longer face the
enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many
of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for them. Jove,
however, put it in my mind to do thus--and I wish I had died then and
there in Egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store for me--I
took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand; then
I went straight up to the king's chariot, clasped his knees and kissed
them, whereon he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot, and took
me weeping to his own home. Many made at me with their ashen spears and
tried to kill me in their fury, but the king protected me, for he feared
the wrath of Jove the protector of strangers, who punishes those who do
evil.

"I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among the
Egyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now going on
for eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning rascal, who
had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me over
into going with him to Phoenicia, where his house and his possessions
lay. I stayed there for a whole twelve months, but at the end of that
time when months and days had gone by till the same season had come
round again, he set me on board a ship bound for Libya, on a pretence
that I was to take a cargo along with him to that place, but really that
he might sell me as a slave and take the money I fetched. I suspected
his intention, but went on board with him, for I could not help it.

"The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the sea
that lies between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselled their
destruction, for as soon as we were well out from Crete and could see
nothing but sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our ship and the
sea grew dark beneath it. Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts and
the ship went round and round and was filled with fire and brimstone
as the lightning struck it. The men fell all into the sea; they
were carried about in the water round the ship looking like so many
sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of getting
home again. I was all dismayed. Jove, however, sent the ship's mast
within my reach, which saved my life, for I clung to it, and drifted
before the fury of the gale. Nine days did I drift but in the darkness
of the tenth night a great wave bore me on to the Thesprotian coast.
There Pheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained me hospitably without
charging me anything at all--for his son found me when I was nearly dead
with cold and fatigue, whereon he raised me by the hand, took me to his
father's house and gave me clothes to wear.

"There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he
had entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on his
homeward journey. He showed me also the treasure of gold, and wrought
iron that Ulysses had got together. There was enough to keep his family
for ten generations, so much had he left in the house of king Pheidon.
But the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove's
mind from the god's high oak tree, and know whether after so long an
absence he should return to Ithaca openly, or in secret. Moreover the
king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in his own house as
he did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew found,
that should take him to his own country. He sent me off however before
Ulysses returned, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing
for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he told those in charge
of her to be sure and take me safely to King Acastus.

"These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to the
very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from land
they resolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me of the shirt
and cloak that I was wearing, and gave me instead the tattered old
clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, they reached
the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there they bound me with a strong rope
fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper by the sea
side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having drawn my rags
over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where I struck out and
swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore near a thick wood
in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at my having escaped and
went searching about for me, till at last they thought it was no further
use and went back to their ship. The gods, having hidden me thus easily,
then took me to a good man's door--for it seems that I am not to die yet
awhile."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Poor unhappy stranger, I
have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but that
part about Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me to believe
it. Why should a man like you go about telling lies in this way? I know
all about the return of my master. The gods one and all of them detest
him, or they would have taken him before Troy, or let him die with
friends around him when the days of his fighting were done; for then the
Achaeans would have built a mound over his ashes and his son would have
been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds have spirited him away
we know not whither.

"As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to the
town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some news
about Ulysses. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both those who
grieve over the king's absence, and those who rejoice at it because they
can eat up his property without paying for it. For my own part I have
never cared about asking anyone else since the time when I was taken in
by an Aetolian, who had killed a man and come a long way till at last
he reached my station, and I was very kind to him. He said he had seen
Ulysses with Idomeneus among the Cretans, refitting his ships which had
been damaged in a gale. He said Ulysses would return in the following
summer or autumn with his men, and that he would bring back much wealth.
And now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has brought you to my
door, do not try to flatter me in this way with vain hopes. It is not
for any such reason that I shall treat you kindly, but only out of
respect for Jove the god of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying
you."

Ulysses answered, "I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I have
given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a
bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your master
comes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me to
Dulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say he will,
set your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder precipice,
as a warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies."

"And a pretty figure I should cut then," replied Eumaeus, "both now and
hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and
showing you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in good earnest
if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men will come in
directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper."

Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with
the pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and a
tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them. But
Eumaeus called to his men and said, "Bring in the best pig you have,
that I may sacrifice him for this stranger, and we will take toll of him
ourselves. We have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs, while
others reap the fruit of our labour."

On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a fine
fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus did not
forget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the first thing
he did was to cut bristles from the pig's face and throw them into the
fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Ulysses might return
home again. Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of oak which he had
kept back when he was chopping the firewood, and stunned it, while the
others slaughtered and singed it. Then they cut it up, and Eumaeus began
by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the fat; these he
sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers; they cut the rest
of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits and roasted them
till they were done; when they had taken them off the spits they
threw them on to the dresser in a heap. The swineherd, who was a most
equitable man, then stood up to give every one his share. He made seven
portions; one of these he set apart for Mercury the son of Maia and the
nymphs, praying to them as he did so; the others he dealt out to the men
man by man. He gave Ulysses some slices cut lengthways down the loin
as a mark of especial honour, and Ulysses was much pleased. "I hope,
Eumaeus," said he, "that Jove will be as well disposed towards you as I
am, for the respect you are showing to an outcast like myself."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Eat, my good fellow, and
enjoy your supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that,
just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses."

As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt
sacrifice to the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering,
put the cup in the hands of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion.
Mesaulius brought them their bread; the swineherd had brought this man
on his own account from among the Taphians during his master's absence,
and had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either
to his mistress or Laertes. They then laid their hands upon the good
things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat and
drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they all went
to bed after having made a hearty supper.

Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon. It
poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West, which is
a wet quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus, in the
excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak and give
it him, or make one of his men give him one. "Listen to me," said he,
"Eumaeus and the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I will tell you
something. It is the wine that makes me talk in this way; wine will make
even a wise man fall to singing; it will make him chuckle and dance
and say many a word that he had better leave unspoken; still, as I have
begun, I will go on. Would that I were still young and strong as when we
got up an ambuscade before Troy. Menelaus and Ulysses were the leaders,
but I was in command also, for the other two would have it so. When we
had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneath our armour
and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwood that grew
about the swamp. It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; the
snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated
thick with rime. The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept
comfortably enough with their shields about their shoulders, but I had
carelessly left my cloak behind me, not thinking that I should be too
cold, and had gone off in nothing but my shirt and shield. When the
night was two-thirds through and the stars had shifted their places, I
nudged Ulysses who was close to me with my elbow, and he at once gave me
his ear.

"'Ulysses,' said I, 'this cold will be the death of me, for I have no
cloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but my shirt,
and I do not know what to do.'

"Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the following
plan:

"'Keep still,' said he in a low voice, 'or the others will hear you.'
Then he raised his head on his elbow.

"'My friends,' said he, 'I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep. We
are a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and tell
Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.'

"On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running
to the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough
till morning. Would that I were still young and strong as I was in those
days, for then some one of you swineherds would give me a cloak both out
of good will and for the respect due to a brave soldier; but now people
look down upon me because my clothes are shabby."

And Eumaeus answered, "Old man, you have told us an excellent story,
and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the
present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else
that a stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow morning
you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for we have
not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has only one.
When Ulysses' son comes home again he will give you both cloak and
shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go."

With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some
goatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. Here
Ulysses lay down, and Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak
that he kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.

Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But the
swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready
to go outside, and Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after his
property during his master's absence. First he slung his sword over his
brawny shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He also
took the skin of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case of
attack from men or dogs. Thus equipped he went to his rest where the
pigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from
the North wind.