Book VII

RECEPTION OF ULYSSES AT THE PALACE OF KING ALCINOUS.

Thus, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the
town. When she reached her father's house she drew up at the gateway,
and her brothers--comely as the gods--gathered round her, took the mules
out of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she
went to her own room, where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira, lit
the fire for her. This old woman had been brought by sea from Apeira,
and had been chosen as a prize for Alcinous because he was king over the
Phaeacians, and the people obeyed him as though he were a god. {57}
She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for her, and
brought her supper for her into her own room.

Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed a
thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proud Phaeacians
who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who he was. Then, as he
was just entering the town, she came towards him in the likeness of a
little girl carrying a pitcher. She stood right in front of him, and
Ulysses said:

"My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous?
I am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in your
town and country."

Then Minerva said, "Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house you
want, for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father. I will go before
you and show the way, but say not a word as you go, and do not look
at any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here cannot abide
strangers, and do not like men who come from some other place. They are
a sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace of Neptune in ships
that glide along like thought, or as a bird in the air."

On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not one
of the Phaeacians could see him as he passed through the city in the
midst of them; for the great goddess Minerva in her good will towards
him had hidden him in a thick cloud of darkness. He admired their
harbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of the city,
which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking, and when
they reached the king's house Minerva said:

"This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show you.
You will find a number of great people sitting at table, but do not be
afraid; go straight in, for the bolder a man is the more likely he is to
carry his point, even though he is a stranger. First find the queen. Her
name is Arete, and she comes of the same family as her husband Alcinous.
They both descend originally from Neptune, who was father to Nausithous
by Periboea, a woman of great beauty. Periboea was the youngest daughter
of Eurymedon, who at one time reigned over the giants, but he ruined his
ill-fated people and lost his own life to boot.

"Neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had a son by him, the
great Nausithous, who reigned over the Phaeacians. Nausithous had two
sons Rhexenor and Alcinous; {58} Apollo killed the first of them while
he was still a bridegroom and without male issue; but he left a daughter
Arete, whom Alcinous married, and honours as no other woman is honoured
of all those that keep house along with their husbands.

"Thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by her
children, by Alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon
her as a goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city, for
she is a thoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when any
women are friends of hers, she will help their husbands also to settle
their disputes. If you can gain her good will, you may have every hope
of seeing your friends again, and getting safely back to your home and
country."

Then Minerva left Scheria and went away over the sea. She went to
Marathon {59} and to the spacious streets of Athens, where she entered
the abode of Erechtheus; but Ulysses went on to the house of Alcinous,
and he pondered much as he paused a while before reaching the threshold
of bronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun or
moon. The walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and the
cornice was of blue enamel. The doors were gold, and hung on pillars of
silver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel was silver and
the hook of the door was of gold.

On either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which Vulcan, with
his consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the
palace of king Alcinous; so they were immortal and could never grow old.
Seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from one end to the
other, with coverings of fine woven work which the women of the house
had made. Here the chief persons of the Phaeacians used to sit and eat
and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and there were golden
figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands, raised on
pedestals, to give light by night to those who were at table. There are
{60} fifty maid servants in the house, some of whom are always grinding
rich yellow grain at the mill, while others work at the loom, or sit and
spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwards like the fluttering
of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that it will turn
oil. As the Phaeacians are the best sailors in the world, so their women
excel all others in weaving, for Minerva has taught them all manner of
useful arts, and they are very intelligent.

Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden of
about four acres with a wall all round it. It is full of beautiful
trees--pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. There are
luscious figs also, and olives in full growth. The fruits never rot nor
fail all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is so
soft that a new crop ripens before the old has dropped. Pear grows on
pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, for
there is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of a part of this,
the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are being
gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further on
have shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others again
are just changing colour. In the furthest part of the ground there are
beautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the year
round. Two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts throughout the
whole garden, while the other is carried under the ground of the outer
court to the house itself, and the town's people draw water from it.
Such, then, were the splendours with which the gods had endowed the
house of king Alcinous.

So here Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he
had looked long enough he crossed the threshold and went within the
precincts of the house. There he found all the chief people among the
Phaeacians making their drink offerings to Mercury, which they always
did the last thing before going away for the night. {61} He went
straight through the court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness
in which Minerva had enveloped him, till he reached Arete and King
Alcinous; then he laid his hands upon the knees of the queen, and at
that moment the miraculous darkness fell away from him and he became
visible. Every one was speechless with surprise at seeing a man there,
but Ulysses began at once with his petition.

"Queen Arete," he exclaimed, "daughter of great Rhexenor, in my distress
I humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests (whom may
heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may they leave their
possessions to their children, and all the honours conferred upon them
by the state) to help me home to my own country as soon as possible; for
I have been long in trouble and away from my friends."

Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their
peace, till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an excellent
speaker and an elder among the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty
addressed them thus:

"Alcinous," said he, "it is not creditable to you that a stranger should
be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one is waiting to
hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise and take a seat
on a stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mix some wine and
water that we may make a drink offering to Jove the lord of thunder,
who takes all well disposed suppliants under his protection; and let
the housekeeper give him some supper, of whatever there may be in the
house."

When Alcinous heard this he took Ulysses by the hand, raised him from
the hearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas, who had been sitting
beside him, and was his favourite son. A maid servant then brought him
water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for
him to wash his hands, and she drew a clean table beside him; an upper
servant brought him bread and offered him many good things of what there
was in the house, and Ulysses ate and drank. Then Alcinous said to one
of the servants, "Pontonous, mix a cup of wine and hand it round that
we may make drink-offerings to Jove the lord of thunder, who is the
protector of all well-disposed suppliants."

Pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering. When they had made their offerings, and
had drunk each as much as he was minded, Alcinous said:

"Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, hear my words. You
have had your supper, so now go home to bed. To-morrow morning I shall
invite a still larger number of aldermen, and will give a sacrificial
banquet in honour of our guest; we can then discuss the question of his
escort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing to his
own country without trouble or inconvenience to himself, no matter how
distant it may be. We must see that he comes to no harm while on his
homeward journey, but when he is once at home he will have to take
the luck he was born with for better or worse like other people. It is
possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who
has come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods
are departing from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made
themselves perfectly clear to us when we have been offering them
hecatombs. They come and sit at our feasts just like one of our selves,
and if any solitary wayfarer happens to stumble upon some one or other
of them, they affect no concealment, for we are as near of kin to the
gods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are." {62}

Then Ulysses said: "Pray, Alcinous, do not take any such notion into
your head. I have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body
nor mind, and most resemble those among you who are the most afflicted.
Indeed, were I to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me,
you would say that I was still worse off than they are. Nevertheless,
let me sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is a very
importunate thing, and thrusts itself on a man's notice no matter how
dire is his distress. I am in great trouble, yet it insists that I shall
eat and drink, bids me lay aside all memory of my sorrows and dwell only
on the due replenishing of itself. As for yourselves, do as you propose,
and at break of day set about helping me to get home. I shall be content
to die if I may first once more behold my property, my bondsmen, and all
the greatness of my house." {63}

Thus did he speak. Every one approved his saying, and agreed that he
should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Then when
they had made their drink offerings, and had drunk each as much as he
was minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode, leaving
Ulysses in the cloister with Arete and Alcinous while the servants were
taking the things away after supper. Arete was the first to speak,
for she recognised the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that Ulysses
was wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so she said,
"Stranger, before we go any further, there is a question I should like
to ask you. Who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes? Did
you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?"

And Ulysses answered, "It would be a long story Madam, were I to relate
in full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been laid
heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is an island far away
in the sea which is called 'the Ogygian.' Here dwells the cunning and
powerful goddess Calypso, daughter of Atlas. She lives by herself far
from all neighbours human or divine. Fortune, however, brought me to
her hearth all desolate and alone, for Jove struck my ship with his
thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. My brave comrades were
drowned every man of them, but I stuck to the keel and was carried
hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at last during the
darkness of the tenth night the gods brought me to the Ogygian island
where the great goddess Calypso lives. She took me in and treated me
with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make me immortal that I
might never grow old, but she could not persuade me to let her do so.

"I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the good
clothes she gave me with my tears during the whole time; but at last
when the eighth year came round she bade me depart of her own free will,
either because Jove had told her she must, or because she had changed
her mind. She sent me from her island on a raft, which she provisioned
with abundance of bread and wine. Moreover she gave me good stout
clothing, and sent me a wind that blew both warm and fair. Days seven
and ten did I sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth I caught sight of
the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast--and glad indeed was
I to set eyes upon them. Nevertheless there was still much trouble in
store for me, for at this point Neptune would let me go no further, and
raised a great storm against me; the sea was so terribly high that I
could no longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under the fury of
the gale, and I had to swim for it, till wind and current brought me to
your shores.

"There I tried to land, but could not, for it was a bad place and the
waves dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to the sea and swam
on till I came to a river that seemed the most likely landing place, for
there were no rocks and it was sheltered from the wind. Here, then, I
got out of the water and gathered my senses together again. Night was
coming on, so I left the river, and went into a thicket, where I covered
myself all over with leaves, and presently heaven sent me off into a
very deep sleep. Sick and sorry as I was I slept among the leaves all
night, and through the next day till afternoon, when I woke as the sun
was westering, and saw your daughter's maid servants playing upon the
beach, and your daughter among them looking like a goddess. I besought
her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent disposition, much more so
than could be expected from so young a person--for young people are apt
to be thoughtless. She gave me plenty of bread and wine, and when she
had had me washed in the river she also gave me the clothes in which you
see me. Now, therefore, though it has pained me to do so, I have told
you the whole truth."

Then Alcinous said, "Stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not to
bring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that she
was the first person whose aid you asked."

"Pray do not scold her," replied Ulysses; "she is not to blame. She did
tell me to follow along with the maids, but I was ashamed and afraid,
for I thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me. Every human
being is sometimes a little suspicious and irritable."

"Stranger," replied Alcinous, "I am not the kind of man to get angry
about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by Father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you are, and how
much you think as I do, I wish you would stay here, marry my daughter,
and become my son-in-law. If you will stay I will give you a house and
an estate, but no one (heaven forbid) shall keep you here against your
own wish, and that you may be sure of this I will attend tomorrow to the
matter of your escort. You can sleep {64} during the whole voyage if you
like, and the men shall sail you over smooth waters either to your own
home, or wherever you please, even though it be a long way further
off than Euboea, which those of my people who saw it when they took
yellow-haired Rhadamanthus to see Tityus the son of Gaia, tell me is the
furthest of any place--and yet they did the whole voyage in a single day
without distressing themselves, and came back again afterwards. You
will thus see how much my ships excel all others, and what magnificent
oarsmen my sailors are."

Then was Ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, "Father Jove, grant that
Alcinous may do all as he has said, for so he will win an imperishable
name among mankind, and at the same time I shall return to my country."

Thus did they converse. Then Arete told her maids to set a bed in the
room that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and to
spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Ulysses to
wear. The maids thereon went out with torches in their hands, and when
they had made the bed they came up to Ulysses and said, "Rise, sir
stranger, and come with us for your bed is ready," and glad indeed was
he to go to his rest.

So Ulysses slept in a bed placed in a room over the echoing gateway; but
Alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his wife by
his side.