Book XI

THE VISIT TO THE DEAD. {88}

"Then, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into the
water and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on
board and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind. Circe,
that great and cunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blew dead aft
and staid steadily with us keeping our sails all the time well filled;
so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship's gear and let her go as the
wind and helmsman headed her. All day long her sails were full as she
held her course over the sea, but when the sun went down and darkness
was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of the river
Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians who live
enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierce
neither at his rising nor as he goes down again out of the heavens, but
the poor wretches live in one long melancholy night. When we got there
we beached the ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the
waters of Oceanus till we came to the place of which Circe had told us.

"Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my sword
and dug the trench a cubit each way. I made a drink-offering to all the
dead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with water,
and I sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying earnestly to
the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when I got back to
Ithaca I would sacrifice a barren heifer for them, the best I had, and
would load the pyre with good things. I also particularly promised
that Teiresias should have a black sheep to himself, the best in all my
flocks. When I had prayed sufficiently to the dead, I cut the throats of
the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereon the ghosts
came trooping up from Erebus--brides, {89} young bachelors, old men worn
out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave men who had
been killed in battle, with their armour still smirched with blood; they
came from every quarter and flitted round the trench with a strange kind
of screaming sound that made me turn pale with fear. When I saw them
coming I told the men to be quick and flay the carcasses of the two dead
sheep and make burnt offerings of them, and at the same time to repeat
prayers to Hades and to Proserpine; but I sat where I was with my sword
drawn and would not let the poor feckless ghosts come near the blood
till Teiresias should have answered my questions.

"The first ghost that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he had
not yet been laid beneath the earth. We had left his body unwaked and
unburied in Circe's house, for we had had too much else to do. I was
very sorry for him, and cried when I saw him: 'Elpenor,' said I, 'how
did you come down here into this gloom and darkness? You have got here
on foot quicker than I have with my ship.'

"'Sir,' he answered with a groan, 'it was all bad luck, and my own
unspeakable drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top of Circe's house,
and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase but fell
right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came down to the house
of Hades. And now I beseech you by all those whom you have left behind
you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father who brought
you up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is the one hope of
your house, do what I shall now ask you. I know that when you leave this
limbo you will again hold your ship for the Aeaean island. Do not
go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you, or I may bring
heaven's anger upon you; but burn me with whatever armour I have, build
a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell people in days to come
what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant over my grave the oar I used
to row with when I was yet alive and with my messmates.' And I said, 'My
poor fellow, I will do all that you have asked of me.'

"Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the one
side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost
of my comrade saying all this to me from the other side. Then came the
ghost of my dead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus. I had left her
alive when I set out for Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her, but
even so, for all my sorrow I would not let her come near the blood till
I had asked my questions of Teiresias.

"Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre
in his hand. He knew me and said, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why,
poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the dead
in this sad place? Stand back from the trench and withdraw your sword
that I may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.'

"So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank of the
blood he began with his prophecy.

"'You want to know,' said he, 'about your return home, but heaven will
make this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape the eye
of Neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having
blinded his son. Still, after much suffering you may get home if you
can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the
Thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging to
the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. If you leave these flocks
unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yet after
much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn you of
the destruction both of your ship and of your men. Even though you may
yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing all your
men, [in another man's ship, and you will find trouble in your house,
which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring your
substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents to your
wife.

"'When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and
after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you must
take a well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a country
where the people have never heard of the sea and do not even mix salt
with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, and oars that
are as the wings of a ship. I will give you this certain token which
cannot escape your notice. A wayfarer will meet you and will say it must
be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your shoulder; on this you
must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar
to Neptune. {90} Then go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in
heaven one after the other. As for yourself, death shall come to you
from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very gently when you are full
of years and peace of mind, and your people shall bless you. All that I
have said will come true].' {91}

"'This,' I answered, 'must be as it may please heaven, but tell me and
tell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother's ghost close by us; she
is sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though I am her own
son she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I can
make her know me.'

"'That,' said he, 'I can soon do. Any ghost that you let taste of the
blood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not let
them have any blood they will go away again.'

"On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for his
prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was until my
mother came up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at once and spoke
fondly to me, saying, 'My son, how did you come down to this abode of
darkness while you are still alive? It is a hard thing for the living to
see these places, for between us and them there are great and terrible
waters, and there is Oceanus, which no man can cross on foot, but he
must have a good ship to take him. Are you all this time trying to find
your way home from Troy, and have you never yet got back to Ithaca nor
seen your wife in your own house?'

"'Mother,' said I, 'I was forced to come here to consult the ghost of
the Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been near the Achaean
land nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but one
long series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set out with
Agamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans. But
tell me, and tell me true, in what way did you die? Did you have a long
illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy passage to eternity?
Tell me also about my father, and the son whom I left behind me, is my
property still in their hands, or has some one else got hold of it, who
thinks that I shall not return to claim it? Tell me again what my wife
intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with my son and
guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she could and
married again?'

"My mother answered, 'Your wife still remains in your house, but she is
in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night
and day. No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and
Telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertain
largely, as of course he must, considering his position as a magistrate,
{92} and how every one invites him; your father remains at his old place
in the country and never goes near the town. He has no comfortable bed
nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor in front of the fire
with the men and goes about all in rags, but in summer, when the warm
weather comes on again, he lies out in the vineyard on a bed of vine
leaves thrown any how upon the ground. He grieves continually about your
never having come home, and suffers more and more as he grows older. As
for my own end it was in this wise: heaven did not take me swiftly and
painlessly in my own house, nor was I attacked by any illness such as
those that generally wear people out and kill them, but my longing to
know what you were doing and the force of my affection for you--this it
was that was the death of me.' {93}

"Then I tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother's ghost.
Thrice I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each
time she flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and
being touched to the quick I said to her, 'Mother, why do you not stay
still when I would embrace you? If we could throw our arms around one
another we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in
the house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay a still further load of
grief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?'

"'My son,' she answered, 'most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not
Proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when they
are dead. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together; these
perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has left the
body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream. Now, however,
go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all these
things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.'

"Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the
wives and daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowds
about the blood, and I considered how I might question them severally.
In the end I deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that
hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at
once. So they came up one after the other, and each one as I questioned
her told me her race and lineage.

"The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife of
Cretheus the son of Aeolus. {94} She fell in love with the river Enipeus
who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when she
was taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as her lover,
lay with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wave arched
itself like a mountain over them to hide both woman and god, whereon he
loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in a deep slumber. When the god
had accomplished the deed of love, he took her hand in his own and
said, 'Tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the gods are not
fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelve months.
Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now go home, but hold your
tongue and do not tell any one.'

"Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias and
Neleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias was
a great breeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived in
Pylos. The rest of her children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson, Pheres,
and Amythaon, who was a mighty warrior and charioteer.

"Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of
having slept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two sons
Amphion and Zethus. These founded Thebes with its seven gates, and built
a wall all round it; for strong though they were they could not hold
Thebes till they had walled it.

"Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Jove
indomitable Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon,
and married the redoubtable son of Amphitryon.

"I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king Oedipodes whose awful lot it
was to marry her own son without suspecting it. He married her after
having killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to the
world; whereon he remained king of Thebes, in great grief for the spite
the gods had borne him; but Epicaste went to the house of the mighty
jailor Hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the avenging spirits
haunted him as for an outraged mother--to his ruing bitterly thereafter.

"Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having given
priceless presents for her. She was youngest daughter to Amphion son of
Iasus and king of Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos. She bore
Nestor, Chromius, and Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously
lovely woman Pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but Neleus
would only give her to him who should raid the cattle of Iphicles from
the grazing grounds of Phylace, and this was a hard task. The only man
who would undertake to raid them was a certain excellent seer, {95} but
the will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the cattle caught
him and put him in prison; nevertheless when a full year had passed and
the same season came round again, Iphicles set him at liberty, after
he had expounded all the oracles of heaven. Thus, then, was the will of
Jove accomplished.

"And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons,
Castor breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer. Both these heroes
are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a special
dispensation of Jove, they die and come to life again, each one of them
every other day throughout all time, and they have the rank of gods.

"After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace
of Neptune. She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were short
lived. They were the finest children that were ever born in this world,
and the best looking, Orion only excepted; for at nine years old they
were nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest. They
threatened to make war with the gods in Olympus, and tried to set Mount
Ossa on the top of Mount Olympus, and Mount Pelion on the top of Ossa,
that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have done it too if
they had been grown up, but Apollo, son of Leto, killed both of them,
before they had got so much as a sign of hair upon their cheeks or chin.

"Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of the
magician Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens, but
he did not enjoy her, for before he could do so Diana killed her in the
island of Dia on account of what Bacchus had said against her.

"I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her own
husband for gold. But it would take me all night if I were to name every
single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw, and it is
time for me to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew, or here. As
for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it."

Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless
throughout the covered cloister. Then Arete said to them:--

"What do you think of this man, O Phaeacians? Is he not tall and good
looking, and is he not clever? True, he is my own guest, but all of you
share in the distinction. Do not be in a hurry to send him away, nor
niggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great need, for
heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance."

Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men among
them, "My friends," said he, "what our august queen has just said to us
is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it;
but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with King
Alcinous."

"The thing shall be done," exclaimed Alcinous, "as surely as I still
live and reign over the Phaeacians. Our guest is indeed very anxious to
get home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow,
by which time I shall be able to get together the whole sum that I mean
to give him. As regards his escort it will be a matter for you all, and
mine above all others as the chief person among you."

And Ulysses answered, "King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stay here
for a whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loaded with your
noble gifts, I should obey you gladly and it would redound greatly to
my advantage, for I should return fuller-handed to my own people, and
should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see me when I get
back to Ithaca."

"Ulysses," replied Alcinous, "not one of us who sees you has any idea
that you are a charlatan or a swindler. I know there are many people
going about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see
through them, but there is a style about your language which assures me
of your good disposition. Moreover you have told the story of your own
misfortunes, and those of the Argives, as though you were a practiced
bard; but tell me, and tell me true, whether you saw any of the mighty
heroes who went to Troy at the same time with yourself, and perished
there. The evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet bed
time--go on, therefore, with your divine story, for I could stay here
listening till tomorrow morning, so long as you will continue to tell us
of your adventures."

"Alcinous," answered Ulysses, "there is a time for making speeches, and
a time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, I will not
refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comrades
who did not fall fighting with the Trojans, but perished on their
return, through the treachery of a wicked woman.

"When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions,
the ghost of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded by
those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus. As soon as he
had tasted the blood, he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out his
arms towards me to embrace me; but he had no strength nor substance any
more, and I too wept and pitied him as I beheld him. 'How did you come
by your death,' said I, 'King Agamemnon? Did Neptune raise his winds and
waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end
of you on the main land when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing,
or while they were fighting in defence of their wives and city?'

"'Ulysses,' he answered, 'noble son of Laertes, I was not lost at sea
in any storm of Neptune's raising, nor did my foes despatch me upon the
mainland, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of me between
them. He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchered me most
miserably as though I were a fat beast in a slaughter house, while all
around me my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the wedding
breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman. You
must have seen numbers of men killed either in a general engagement, or
in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable as the
way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing bowl and the
loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our blood. I
heard Priam's daughter Cassandra scream as Clytemnestra killed her close
beside me. I lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body, and
raised my hands to kill the slut of a murderess, but she slipped away
from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when I was dying,
for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless as a woman
when she has fallen into such guilt as hers was. Fancy murdering her own
husband! I thought I was going to be welcomed home by my children and my
servants, but her abominable crime has brought disgrace on herself and
all women who shall come after--even on the good ones.'

"And I said, 'In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus from first to
last in the matter of their women's counsels. See how many of us fell
for Helen's sake, and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatched mischief
against you too during your absence.'

"'Be sure, therefore,' continued Agamemnon, 'and not be too friendly
even with your own wife. Do not tell her all that you know perfectly
well yourself. Tell her a part only, and keep your own counsel about the
rest. Not that your wife, Ulysses, is likely to murder you, for Penelope
is a very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. We left her a
young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out for Troy. This
child no doubt is now grown up happily to man's estate, {96} and he and
his father will have a joyful meeting and embrace one another as it is
right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not even allow me
the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed me ere I could do so.
Furthermore I say--and lay my saying to your heart--do not tell people
when you are bringing your ship to Ithaca, but steal a march upon them,
for after all this there is no trusting women. But now tell me, and
tell me true, can you give me any news of my son Orestes? Is he in
Orchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta with Menelaus--for I presume
that he is still living.'

"And I said, 'Agamemnon, why do you ask me? I do not know whether your
son is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does not
know.'

"As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the ghost
of Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax who was
the finest and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus.
The fleet descendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously, saying,
'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, what deed of daring will you undertake
next, that you venture down to the house of Hades among us silly dead,
who are but the ghosts of them that can labour no more?'

"And I said, 'Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the
Achaeans, I came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise me
about my return home to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to get
near the Achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been
in trouble all the time. As for you, Achilles, no one was ever yet so
fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored by all
us Argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are here you are
a great prince among the dead. Do not, therefore, take it so much to
heart even if you are dead.'

"'Say not a word,' he answered, 'in death's favour; I would rather be
a paid servant in a poor man's house and be above ground than king of
kings among the dead. But give me news about my son; is he gone to the
wars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so? Tell me also if
you have heard anything about my father Peleus--does he still rule among
the Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout Hellas and
Phthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him? Could I but stand by
his side, in the light of day, with the same strength that I had when I
killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of Troy--could I but be
as I then was and go even for a short time to my father's house, any one
who tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.'

"'I have heard nothing,' I answered, 'of Peleus, but I can tell you all
about your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from Scyros
with the Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was always
first to speak, and his judgement was unerring. Nestor and I were the
only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on the
plain of Troy, he would never remain with the body of his men, but would
dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. Many a man did
he kill in battle--I cannot name every single one of those whom he slew
while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only say how
he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who was the
handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also of the
Ceteians fell around him by reason of a woman's bribes. Moreover, when
all the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus had
made, and it was left to me to settle when we should either open the
door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders and
chief men among the Danaans were drying their eyes and quaking in every
limb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear from his cheek;
he was all the time urging me to break out from the horse--grasping
the handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing fury
against the foe. Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he got his
handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is the fortune
of war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown spear nor in
close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of great chance.'

"When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across a
meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning the
prowess of his son.

"The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his own
melancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof--still
angry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about the armour
of Achilles. Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the Trojan prisoners
and Minerva were the judges. Would that I had never gained the day in
such a contest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who was foremost of all
the Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in stature and prowess.

"When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, 'Ajax, will you not
forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that
hateful armour still rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough to
lose such a tower of strength as you were to us. We mourned you as much
as we mourned Achilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid
on anything but on the spite which Jove bore against the Danaans, for it
was this that made him counsel your destruction--come hither, therefore,
bring your proud spirit into subjection, and hear what I can tell you.'

"He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other ghosts;
nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his being
so angry, or I should have gone on talking to him, {97} only that there
were still others among the dead whom I desired to see.

"Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand
sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting
and standing round him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his
sentences upon them.

"After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving the
ghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and he
had a great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.

"And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering some
nine acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him were digging
their beaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat them off with
his hands, but could not; for he had violated Jove's mistress Leto as
she was going through Panopeus on her way to Pytho.

"I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake that
reached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never
reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it
dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground--parched
by the spite of heaven. There were tall trees, moreover, that shed their
fruit over his head--pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs and juicy
olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out his hand to take
some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the clouds.

"And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone
with both his hands. With hands and feet he tried to roll it up to the
top of the hill, but always, just before he could roll it over on to the
other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the pitiless stone
{98} would come thundering down again on to the plain. Then he would
begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran off him and the
steam rose after him.

"After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he is
feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife, who
is daughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming round him like
scared birds flying all whithers. He looked black as night with his bare
bow in his hands and his arrow on the string, glaring around as though
ever on the point of taking aim. About his breast there was a wondrous
golden belt adorned in the most marvellous fashion with bears, wild
boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there was also war, battle, and
death. The man who made that belt, do what he might, would never be able
to make another like it. Hercules knew me at once when he saw me, and
spoke piteously, saying, 'My poor Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, are
you too leading the same sorry kind of life that I did when I was above
ground? I was son of Jove, but I went through an infinity of suffering,
for I became bondsman to one who was far beneath me--a low fellow
who set me all manner of labours. He once sent me here to fetch the
hell-hound--for he did not think he could find anything harder for me
than this, but I got the hound out of Hades and brought him to him, for
Mercury and Minerva helped me.'

"On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayed
where I was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me.
And I should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom
I would fain have seen--Theseus and Pirithous--glorious children of the
gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round me and uttered such
appalling cries, that I was panic stricken lest Proserpine should send
up from the house of Hades the head of that awful monster Gorgon. On
this I hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board at
once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places,
whereon the ship went down the stream of the river Oceanus. We had to
row at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up.