Book XXIV

THE GHOSTS OF THE SUITORS IN HADES--ULYSSES AND HIS MEN GO TO THE HOUSE
OF LAERTES--THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA COME OUT TO ATTACK ULYSSES, BUT MINERVA
CONCLUDES A PEACE.

Then Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his
hand he held the fair golden wand with which he seals men's eyes in
sleep or wakes them just as he pleases; with this he roused the ghosts
and led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind him. As
bats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when one of them
has fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even so did the ghosts
whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of sorrow led them down into the
dark abode of death. When they had passed the waters of Oceanus and the
rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and the land of dreams,
whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwell the souls and
shadows of them that can labour no more.

Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those of
Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man
of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus himself.

They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost of
Agamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly. Round him were gathered also
the ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus;
and the ghost of Achilles spoke first.

"Son of Atreus," it said, "we used to say that Jove had loved you better
from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain over many
and brave men, when we were all fighting together before Troy; yet the
hand of death, which no mortal can escape, was laid upon you all too
early. Better for you had you fallen at Troy in the hey-day of your
renown, for the Achaeans would have built a mound over your ashes, and
your son would have been heir to your good name, whereas it has now been
your lot to come to a most miserable end."

"Happy son of Peleus," answered the ghost of Agamemnon, "for having
died at Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and the
Achaeans fell round you fighting for your body. There you lay in the
whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of your
chivalry. We fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should we ever
have left off if Jove had not sent a hurricane to stay us. Then, when we
had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid you on your bed and
cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments. The Danaans
tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you. Your mother, when she
heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, and the sound
of a great wailing went forth over the waters so that the Achaeans
quaked for fear. They would have fled panic-stricken to their ships had
not wise old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked them saying,
'Hold, Argives, fly not sons of the Achaeans, this is his mother coming
from the sea with her immortal nymphs to view the body of her son.'

"Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more. The daughters of the
old man of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you
in immortal raiment. The nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet
voices in lament--calling and answering one another; there was not an
Argive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. Days and nights
seven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on the
eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many a fat sheep with many
an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. You were burnt in raiment of
the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes, horse and foot,
clashed their armour round the pile as you were burning, with the tramp
as of a great multitude. But when the flames of heaven had done
their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak and laid them in
ointments and in pure wine. Your mother brought us a golden vase to hold
them--gift of Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself; in this we mingled
your bleached bones with those of Patroclus who had gone before you, and
separate we enclosed also those of Antilochus, who had been closer to
you than any other of your comrades now that Patroclus was no more.

"Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a point
jutting out over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from far
out upon the sea by those now living and by them that shall be born
hereafter. Your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them
to be contended for by the noblest of the Achaeans. You must have
been present at the funeral of many a hero, when the young men gird
themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of some
great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed Thetis
offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. Thus even in death
your fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermore
among all mankind. But as for me, what solace had I when the days of my
fighting were done? For Jove willed my destruction on my return, by the
hands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife."

Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with the
ghosts of the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses. The ghosts of
Agamemnon and Achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up
to them at once. The ghost of Agamemnon recognised Amphimedon son of
Melaneus, who lived in Ithaca and had been his host, so it began to talk
to him.

"Amphimedon," it said, "what has happened to all you fine young men--all
of an age too--that you are come down here under the ground? One could
pick no finer body of men from any city. Did Neptune raise his winds and
waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end
of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing,
or while fighting in defence of their wives and city? Answer my
question, for I have been your guest. Do you not remember how I came to
your house with Menelaus, to persuade Ulysses to join us with his ships
against Troy? It was a whole month ere we could resume our voyage, for
we had hard work to persuade Ulysses to come with us."

And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, "Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king of
men, I remember everything that you have said, and will tell you fully
and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about. Ulysses
had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did not say point
blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, for she
meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was the trick she played
us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room and began to work on an
enormous piece of fine needlework. 'Sweethearts,' said she, 'Ulysses
is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately;
wait--for I would not have my skill in needlework perish
unrecorded--till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes, against
the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of
the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.' This is what she
said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working upon her great
web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches again
by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years without our
finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year,
in the waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, one of her
maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act
of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no;
and when she showed us the robe she had made, after she had had it
washed, {186} its splendour was as that of the sun or moon.

"Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where his
swineherd lives. Thither presently came also his son, returning from
a voyage to Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched
their plot for our destruction. Telemachus came first, and then after
him, accompanied by the swineherd, came Ulysses, clad in rags and
leaning on a staff as though he were some miserable old beggar. He came
so unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older ones among
us, and we reviled him and threw things at him. He endured both being
struck and insulted without a word, though he was in his own house; but
when the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he and Telemachus
took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doors behind
them. Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a quantity
of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this was the
beginning of our end, for not one of us could string the bow--nor nearly
do so. When it was about to reach the hands of Ulysses, we all of us
shouted out that it should not be given him, no matter what he might
say, but Telemachus insisted on his having it. When he had got it in his
hands he strung it with ease and sent his arrow through the iron. Then
he stood on the floor of the cloister and poured his arrows on the
ground, glaring fiercely about him. First he killed Antinous, and then,
aiming straight before him, he let fly his deadly darts and they fell
thick on one another. It was plain that some one of the gods was
helping them, for they fell upon us with might and main throughout the
cloisters, and there was a hideous sound of groaning as our brains
were being battered in, and the ground seethed with our blood. This,
Agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and our bodies are lying still
uncared for in the house of Ulysses, for our friends at home do not
yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us out and wash
the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us according to the
offices due to the departed."

"Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes," replied the ghost of Agamemnon, "you
are indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such rare
excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as
Penelope the daughter of Icarius. The fame, therefore, of her virtue
shall never die, and the immortals shall compose a song that shall be
welcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of Penelope. How far
otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of Tyndareus who killed her
lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men, for she has brought
disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones."

Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within the bowels
of the earth. Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of the town
and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes, which he
had reclaimed with infinite labour. Here was his house, with a lean-to
running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him slept and sat
and ate, while inside the house there was an old Sicel woman, who looked
after him in this his country-farm. When Ulysses got there, he said to
his son and to the other two:

"Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.
Meanwhile I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to
recognise me after so long an absence."

He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius, who
went straight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard to
make trial of his father. As he went down into the great orchard, he did
not see Dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for they
were all gathering thorns to make a fence for the vineyard, at the place
where the old man had told them; he therefore found his father alone,
hoeing a vine. He had on a dirty old shirt, patched and very shabby;
his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to save him from the
brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather; he had a goat skin cap on
his head, and was looking very woe-begone. When Ulysses saw him so worn,
so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under a tall pear tree and
began to weep. He doubted whether to embrace him, kiss him, and tell him
all about his having come home, or whether he should first question him
and see what he would say. In the end he deemed it best to be crafty
with him, so in this mind he went up to his father, who was bending down
and digging about a plant.

"I see, sir," said Ulysses, "that you are an excellent gardener--what
pains you take with it, to be sure. There is not a single plant, not a
fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace of your
attention. I trust, however, that you will not be offended if I say
that you take better care of your garden than of yourself. You are old,
unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It cannot be because you are idle that
your master takes such poor care of you, indeed your face and figure
have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim you of noble birth.
I should have said that you were one of those who should wash well, eat
well, and lie soft at night as old men have a right to do; but tell me,
and tell me true, whose bondman are you, and in whose garden are you
working? Tell me also about another matter. Is this place that I have
come to really Ithaca? I met a man just now who said so, but he was a
dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story out when I was
asking him about an old friend of mine, whether he was still living, or
was already dead and in the house of Hades. Believe me when I tell you
that this man came to my house once when I was in my own country and
never yet did any stranger come to me whom I liked better. He said that
his family came from Ithaca and that his father was Laertes, son of
Arceisius. I received him hospitably, making him welcome to all the
abundance of my house, and when he went away I gave him all customary
presents. I gave him seven talents of fine gold, and a cup of solid
silver with flowers chased upon it. I gave him twelve light cloaks,
and as many pieces of tapestry; I also gave him twelve cloaks of single
fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts.
To all this I added four good looking women skilled in all useful arts,
and I let him take his choice."

His father shed tears and answered, "Sir, you have indeed come to the
country that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked
people. All this wealth of presents has been given to no purpose. If
you could have found your friend here alive in Ithaca, he would have
entertained you hospitably and would have requited your presents amply
when you left him--as would have been only right considering what you
had already given him. But tell me, and tell me true, how many years is
it since you entertained this guest--my unhappy son, as ever was? Alas!
He has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the sea have
eaten him, or he has fallen a prey to the birds and wild beasts of some
continent. Neither his mother, nor I his father, who were his parents,
could throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor could
his excellent and richly dowered wife Penelope bewail her husband as was
natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to the offices
due to the departed. But now, tell me truly for I want to know. Who
and whence are you--tell me of your town and parents? Where is the
ship lying that has brought you and your men to Ithaca? Or were you a
passenger on some other man's ship, and those who brought you here have
gone on their way and left you?"

"I will tell you everything," answered Ulysses, "quite truly. I come
from Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am son of king Apheidas, who
is the son of Polypemon. My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove me off my
course as I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried here against
my will. As for my ship it is lying over yonder, off the open country
outside the town, and this is the fifth year since Ulysses left my
country. Poor fellow, yet the omens were good for him when he left me.
The birds all flew on our right hands, and both he and I rejoiced to
see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should have another
friendly meeting and exchange presents."

A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened. He filled both
hands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey
head, groaning heavily as he did so. The heart of Ulysses was touched,
and his nostrils quivered as he looked upon his father; then he sprang
towards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying, "I am he,
father, about whom you are asking--I have returned after having been
away for twenty years. But cease your sighing and lamentation--we have
no time to lose, for I should tell you that I have been killing the
suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes."

"If you really are my son Ulysses," replied Laertes, "and have come back
again, you must give me such manifest proof of your identity as shall
convince me."

"First observe this scar," answered Ulysses, "which I got from a boar's
tusk when I was hunting on Mt. Parnassus. You and my mother had sent me
to Autolycus, my mother's father, to receive the presents which when he
was over here he had promised to give me. Furthermore I will point out
to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked you all
about them as I followed you round the garden. We went over them all,
and you told me their names and what they all were. You gave me thirteen
pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you also said you
would give me fifty rows of vines; there was corn planted between each
row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat of heaven has
been laid heavy upon them."

Laertes' strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs which
his son had given him. He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had to
support him, or he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon as he
came to, and was beginning to recover his senses, he said, "O father
Jove, then you gods are still in Olympus after all, if the suitors have
really been punished for their insolence and folly. Nevertheless, I
am much afraid that I shall have all the townspeople of Ithaca up here
directly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout the
cities of the Cephallenians."

Ulysses answered, "Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that,
but let us go into the house hard by your garden. I have already told
Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready
as soon as possible."

Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. When they got
there they found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting
up meat and mixing wine with water. Then the old Sicel woman took
Laertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil. She put him on
a good cloak, and Minerva came up to him and gave him a more imposing
presence, making him taller and stouter than before. When he came back
his son was surprised to see him looking so like an immortal, and said
to him, "My dear father, some one of the gods has been making you much
taller and better-looking."

Laertes answered, "Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that
I were the man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and took
Nericum, that strong fortress on the foreland. If I were still what I
then was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on, I should
have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors. I
should have killed a great many of them, and you would have rejoiced to
see it."

Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their
work and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his proper
place on the benches and seats. Then they began eating; by and by old
Dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for their mother, the
Sicel woman who looked after Laertes now that he was growing old, had
been to fetch them. When they saw Ulysses and were certain it was he,
they stood there lost in astonishment; but Ulysses scolded them good
naturedly and said, "Sit down to your dinner, old man, and never mind
about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin for some time and
have been waiting for you."

Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses. "Sir," said
he, seizing his master's hand and kissing it at the wrist, "we have long
been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after we
had given up hoping. All hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper you.
{187} But tell me, does Penelope already know of your return, or shall
we send some one to tell her?"

"Old man," answered Ulysses, "she knows already, so you need not trouble
about that." On this he took his seat, and the sons of Dolius gathered
round Ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after the other;
then they took their seats in due order near Dolius their father.

While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went round
the town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the
suitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered
from every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses.
They took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodies
of those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for the
fishermen to take each of them to his own place. They then met angrily
in the place of assembly, and when they were got together Eupeithes
rose to speak. He was overwhelmed with grief for the death of his son
Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses, so he said,
weeping bitterly, "My friends, this man has done the Achaeans great
wrong. He took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he
has lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he has been
killing all the foremost men among the Cephallenians. Let us be up and
doing before he can get away to Pylos or to Elis where the Epeans rule,
or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards. It will be an
everlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder of our sons
and brothers. For my own part I should have no more pleasure in life,
but had rather die at once. Let us be up, then, and after them, before
they can cross over to the main land."

He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him. But Medon and the bard
Phemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses.
Every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle of
the assembly, and Medon said, "Hear me, men of Ithaca. Ulysses did not
do these things against the will of heaven. I myself saw an immortal god
take the form of Mentor and stand beside him. This god appeared, now in
front of him encouraging him, and now going furiously about the court
and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick on one another."

On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son of Mastor,
rose to speak, for he was the only man among them who knew both past and
future; so he spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying,

"Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out as
they have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when we
bade you check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the
wantonness of their hearts--wasting the substance and dishonouring the
wife of a chieftain who they thought would not return. Now, however, let
it be as I say, and do as I tell you. Do not go out against Ulysses, or
you may find that you have been drawing down evil on your own heads."

This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and at
once left the assembly. But the rest stayed where they were, for the
speech of Halitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes;
they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed
themselves, they met together in front of the city, and Eupeithes led
them on in their folly. He thought he was going to avenge the murder
of his son, whereas in truth he was never to return, but was himself to
perish in his attempt.

Then Minerva said to Jove, "Father, son of Saturn, king of kings, answer
me this question--What do you propose to do? Will you set them fighting
still further, or will you make peace between them?"

And Jove answered, "My child, why should you ask me? Was it not by your
own arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the
suitors? Do whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think will
be most reasonable arrangement. Now that Ulysses is revenged, let them
swear to a solemn covenant, in virtue of which he shall continue to
rule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre of
their sons and brothers. Let them then all become friends as heretofore,
and let peace and plenty reign."

This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she
darted from off the topmost summits of Olympus.

Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began by
saying, "Some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up
to us." So one of Dolius's sons went as he was bid. Standing on the
threshold he could see them all quite near, and said to Ulysses, "Here
they are, let us put on our armour at once."

They put on their armour as fast as they could--that is to say Ulysses,
his three men, and the six sons of Dolius. Laertes also and Dolius did
the same--warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. When they
had all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth,
Ulysses leading the way.

Then Jove's daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the form
and voice of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to
his son Telemachus, "Telemachus, now that you are about to fight in an
engagement, which will show every man's mettle, be sure not to disgrace
your ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all the
world over."

"You say truly, my dear father," answered Telemachus, "and you shall
see, if you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace your family."

Laertes was delighted when he heard this. "Good heavens," he exclaimed,
"what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it. My son and
grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour."

On this Minerva came close up to him and said, "Son of Arceisius---best
friend I have in the world--pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to Jove
her father; then poise your spear and hurl it."

As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayed
to her he poised his spear and hurled it. He hit Eupeithes' helmet, and
the spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and
his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Meantime Ulysses and his son fell upon the front line of the foe and
smote them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killed
every one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again,
only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause. "Men of
Ithaca," she cried, "cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter at
once without further bloodshed."

On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their
arms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of
the goddess' voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. But
Ulysses gave a great cry, and gathering himself together swooped down
like a soaring eagle. Then the son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt of fire
that fell just in front of Minerva, so she said to Ulysses, "Ulysses,
noble son of Laertes, stop this warful strife, or Jove will be angry
with you."

Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly. Then Minerva assumed
the form and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peace
between the two contending parties.