Book XVI

ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO TELEMACHUS.

Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and were
were getting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men out
with the pigs. When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark but fawned
upon him, so Ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing that the
dogs did not bark, said to Eumaeus:

"Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one of
your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him and
not barking."

The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at the door.
Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixing wine
fell from his hands, as he made towards his master. He kissed his head
and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could not be
more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his old age,
after ten years' absence in a foreign country and after having gone
through much hardship. He embraced him, kissed him all over as though he
had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying:

"So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. When I
heard you had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see you any
more. Come in, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a good look
at you now you are home again; it is not very often you come into
the country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to the town
generally. I suppose you think it better to keep an eye on what the
suitors are doing."

"So be it, old friend," answered Telemachus, "but I am come now because
I want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her
old home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed of
Ulysses is without bedding and covered with cobwebs."

"She is still at the house," replied Eumaeus, "grieving and breaking her
heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually."

As he spoke he took Telemachus' spear, whereon he crossed the stone
threshold and came inside. Ulysses rose from his seat to give him place
as he entered, but Telemachus checked him; "Sit down, stranger," said
he, "I can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay
it for me."

Ulysses went back to his own place, and Eumaeus strewed some green
brushwood on the floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it for Telemachus
to sit upon. Then the swineherd brought them platters of cold meat, the
remains from what they had eaten the day before, and he filled the bread
baskets with bread as fast as he could. He mixed wine also in bowls of
ivy-wood, and took his seat facing Ulysses. Then they laid their hands
on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink Telemachus said to Eumaeus, "Old friend, where
does this stranger come from? How did his crew bring him to Ithaca, and
who were they?--for assuredly he did not come here by land."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "My son, I will tell you
the real truth. He says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a great
traveller. At this moment he is running away from a Thesprotian ship,
and has taken refuge at my station, so I will put him into your hands.
Do whatever you like with him, only remember that he is your suppliant."

"I am very much distressed," said Telemachus, "by what you have just
told me. How can I take this stranger into my house? I am as yet young,
and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. My mother
cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look after the
house out of respect for public opinion and the memory of her husband,
or whether the time is now come for her to take the best man of those
who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the most advantageous
offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station I will find him
a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a sword and sandals, and will send
him wherever he wants to go. Or if you like you can keep him here at the
station, and I will send him clothes and food that he may be no burden
on you and on your men; but I will not have him go near the suitors,
for they are very insolent, and are sure to ill treat him in a way that
would greatly grieve me; no matter how valiant a man may be he can do
nothing against numbers, for they will be too strong for him."

Then Ulysses said, "Sir, it is right that I should say something myself.
I am much shocked about what you have said about the insolent way in
which the suitors are behaving in despite of such a man as you are. Tell
me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or has some god set your
people against you? May you not complain of your brothers--for it is to
these that a man may look for support, however great his quarrel may be?
I wish I were as young as you are and in my present mind; if I were son
to Ulysses, or, indeed, Ulysses himself, I would rather some one came
and cut my head off, but I would go to the house and be the bane of
every one of these men. {139} If they were too many for me--I being
single-handed--I would rather die fighting in my own house than see such
disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grossly maltreated, and men
dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way, wine
drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to no purpose for an end that
shall never be accomplished."

And Telemachus answered, "I will tell you truly everything. There is no
enmity between me and my people, nor can I complain of brothers, to whom
a man may look for support however great his quarrel may be. Jove has
made us a race of only sons. Laertes was the only son of Arceisius, and
Ulysses only son of Laertes. I am myself the only son of Ulysses who
left me behind him when he went away, so that I have never been of any
use to him. Hence it comes that my house is in the hands of numberless
marauders; for the chiefs from all the neighbouring islands, Dulichium,
Same, Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself, are
eating up my house under the pretext of paying court to my mother, who
will neither say point blank that she will not marry, nor yet bring
matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, and before
long will do so with myself into the bargain. The issue, however,
rests with heaven. But do you, old friend Eumaeus, go at once and tell
Penelope that I am safe and have returned from Pylos. Tell it to herself
alone, and then come back here without letting any one else know, for
there are many who are plotting mischief against me."

"I understand and heed you," replied Eumaeus; "you need instruct me no
further, only as I am going that way say whether I had not better let
poor Laertes know that you are returned. He used to superintend the work
on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about Ulysses, and he would
eat and drink at will along with his servants; but they tell me that
from the day on which you set out for Pylos he has neither eaten nor
drunk as he ought to do, nor does he look after his farm, but sits
weeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones."

"More's the pity," answered Telemachus, "I am sorry for him, but we must
leave him to himself just now. If people could have everything their own
way, the first thing I should choose would be the return of my father;
but go, and give your message; then make haste back again, and do not
turn out of your way to tell Laertes. Tell my mother to send one of her
women secretly with the news at once, and let him hear it from her."

Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals,
bound them to his feet, and started for the town. Minerva watched
him well off the station, and then came up to it in the form of a
woman--fair, stately, and wise. She stood against the side of the entry,
and revealed herself to Ulysses, but Telemachus could not see her, and
knew not that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves be seen
by everybody. Ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs, for they did not
bark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of the yards.
She nodded her head and motioned to Ulysses with her eyebrows; whereon
he left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of the yards.
Then she said to him:

"Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is now time for you to tell your
son: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the
destruction of the suitors, and then make for the town. I will not be
long in joining you, for I too am eager for the fray."

As she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. First she threw
a fair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him
younger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his colour,
filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again. Then she
went away and Ulysses came back inside the hut. His son was astounded
when he saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear he might be looking
upon a god.

"Stranger," said he, "how suddenly you have changed from what you were
a moment or two ago. You are dressed differently and your colour is not
the same. Are you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven? If
so, be propitious to me till I can make you due sacrifice and offerings
of wrought gold. Have mercy upon me."

And Ulysses said, "I am no god, why should you take me for one? I am
your father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at the hands
of lawless men."

As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell from his cheek on to the
ground, for he had restrained all tears till now. But Telemachus could
not yet believe that it was his father, and said:

"You are not my father, but some god is flattering me with vain hopes
that I may grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himself
contrive to do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and young
at a moment's notice, unless a god were with him. A second ago you
were old and all in rags, and now you are like some god come down from
heaven."

Ulysses answered, "Telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurably
astonished at my being really here. There is no other Ulysses who will
come hereafter. Such as I am, it is I, who after long wandering and much
hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own country. What you
wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess Minerva, who does with
me whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases. At one moment she
makes me like a beggar, and the next I am a young man with good clothes
on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who live in heaven to make
any man look either rich or poor."

As he spoke he sat down, and Telemachus threw his arms about his father
and wept. They were both so much moved that they cried aloud like eagles
or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their half
fledged young by peasants. Thus piteously did they weep, and the sun
would have gone down upon their mourning if Telemachus had not suddenly
said, "In what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring you to Ithaca?
Of what nation did they declare themselves to be--for you cannot have
come by land?"

"I will tell you the truth, my son," replied Ulysses. "It was the
Phaeacians who brought me here. They are great sailors, and are in the
habit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. They took
me over the sea while I was fast asleep, and landed me in Ithaca, after
giving me many presents in bronze, gold, and raiment. These things by
heaven's mercy are lying concealed in a cave, and I am now come here on
the suggestion of Minerva that we may consult about killing our enemies.
First, therefore, give me a list of the suitors, with their number, that
I may learn who, and how many, they are. I can then turn the matter
over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the whole body of them
ourselves, or whether we must find others to help us."

To this Telemachus answered, "Father, I have always heard of your renown
both in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is a very
great one: I am awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannot stand
against many and brave ones. There are not ten suitors only, nor twice
ten, but ten many times over; you shall learn their number at once.
There are fifty-two chosen youths from Dulichium, and they have six
servants; from Same there are twenty-four; twenty young Achaeans from
Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself, all of them well born. They
have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and two men who can carve at
table. If we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause to rue
your coming, and your revenge. See whether you cannot think of some one
who would be willing to come and help us."

"Listen to me," replied Ulysses, "and think whether Minerva and her
father Jove may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try and find some
one else as well."

"Those whom you have named," answered Telemachus, "are a couple of good
allies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have power
over both gods and men."

"These two," continued Ulysses, "will not keep long out of the fray,
when the suitors and we join fight in my house. Now, therefore, return
home early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as
before. Later on the swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as a
miserable old beggar. If you see them ill treating me, steel your heart
against my sufferings; even though they drag me feet foremost out of
the house, or throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently
trying to make them behave more reasonably; but they will not listen to
you, for the day of their reckoning is at hand. Furthermore I say, and
lay my saying to your heart; when Minerva shall put it in my mind, I
will nod my head to you, and on seeing me do this you must collect all
the armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store room.
Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing it; say
that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as it
is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but has become soiled
and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly that you are
afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that they
may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and wooing,
for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them. But leave
a sword and a spear apiece for yourself and me, and a couple of oxhide
shields so that we can snatch them up at any moment; Jove and Minerva
will then soon quiet these people. There is also another matter; if you
are indeed my son and my blood runs in your veins, let no one know that
Ulysses is within the house--neither Laertes, nor yet the swineherd, nor
any of the servants, nor even Penelope herself. Let you and me exploit
the women alone, and let us also make trial of some other of the men
servants, to see who is on our side and whose hand is against us."

"Father," replied Telemachus, "you will come to know me by and by, and
when you do you will find that I can keep your counsel. I do not think,
however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either of us. Think
it over. It will take us a long time to go the round of the farms and
exploit the men, and all the time the suitors will be wasting your
estate with impunity and without compunction. Prove the women by all
means, to see who are disloyal and who guiltless, but I am not in favour
of going round and trying the men. We can attend to that later on, if
you really have some sign from Jove that he will support you."

Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought
Telemachus and his crew from Pylos had reached the town of Ithaca. When
they had come inside the harbour they drew the ship on to the land;
their servants came and took their armour from them, and they left all
the presents at the house of Clytius. Then they sent a servant to tell
Penelope that Telemachus had gone into the country, but had sent the
ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy.
This servant and Eumaeus happened to meet when they were both on the
same errand of going to tell Penelope. When they reached the House, the
servant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waiting
women, "Your son, Madam, is now returned from Pylos"; but Eumaeus went
close up to Penelope, and said privately all that her son had bidden
him tell her. When he had given his message he left the house with its
outbuildings and went back to his pigs again.

The suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they
went outside the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held
a council near the main entrance. Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was the
first to speak.

"My friends," said he, "this voyage of Telemachus's is a very serious
matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing. Now, however,
let us draw a ship into the water, and get a crew together to send after
the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can."

He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomus turned in his place and
saw the ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, and
putting by their oars; so he laughed, and said to the others, "We need
not send them any message, for they are here. Some god must have told
them, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake her."

On this they rose and went to the water side. The crew then drew the
ship on shore; their servants took their armour from them, and they went
up in a body to the place of assembly, but they would not let any one
old or young sit along with them, and Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke
first.

"Good heavens," said he, "see how the gods have saved this man from
destruction. We kept a succession of scouts upon the headlands all day
long, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, but
waited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing and
killing him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us. Let
us consider how we can make an end of him. He must not escape us; our
affair is never likely to come off while he is alive, for he is very
shrewd, and public feeling is by no means all on our side. We must make
haste before he can call the Achaeans in assembly; he will lose no time
in doing so, for he will be furious with us, and will tell all the world
how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. The people will not
like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they do us no
hurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile. Let us try and
lay hold of him either on his farm away from the town, or on the road
hither. Then we can divide up his property amongst us, and let his
mother and the man who marries her have the house. If this does not
please you, and you wish Telemachus to live on and hold his father's
property, then we must not gather here and eat up his goods in this way,
but must make our offers to Penelope each from his own house, and she
can marry the man who will give the most for her, and whose lot it is to
win her."

They all held their peace until Amphinomus rose to speak. He was the son
of Nisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was foremost among all the
suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island of Dulichium; his
conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to Penelope than that of any
of the other suitors, for he was a man of good natural disposition. "My
friends," said he, speaking to them plainly and in all honestly, "I am
not in favour of killing Telemachus. It is a heinous thing to kill one
who is of noble blood. Let us first take counsel of the gods, and if the
oracles of Jove advise it, I will both help to kill him myself, and will
urge everyone else to do so; but if they dissuade us, I would have you
hold your hands."

Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose
forthwith and went to the house of Ulysses, where they took their
accustomed seats.

Then Penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors. She
knew of the plot against Telemachus, for the servant Medon had overheard
their counsels and had told her; she went down therefore to the court
attended by her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she stood by
one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister holding a
veil before her face, and rebuked Antinous saying:

"Antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best
speaker and counsellor of any man your own age in Ithaca, but you are
nothing of the kind. Madman, why should you try to compass the death
of Telemachus, and take no heed of suppliants, whose witness is Jove
himself? It is not right for you to plot thus against one another.
Do you not remember how your father fled to this house in fear of the
people, who were enraged against him for having gone with some Taphian
pirates and plundered the Thesprotians who were at peace with us? They
wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he had, but Ulysses
stayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devour his
property without paying for it, and break my heart by wooing his wife
and trying to kill his son. Leave off doing so, and stop the others
also."

To this Eurymachus son of Polybus answered, "Take heart, Queen Penelope
daughter of Icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters.
The man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon
your son Telemachus, while I yet live to look upon the face of the
earth. I say--and it shall surely be--that my spear shall be reddened
with his blood; for many a time has Ulysses taken me on his knees,
held wine up to my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands.
Therefore Telemachus is much the dearest friend I have, and has nothing
to fear from the hands of us suitors. Of course, if death comes to him
from the gods, he cannot escape it." He said this to quiet her, but in
reality he was plotting against Telemachus.

Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till Minerva
shed sleep over her eyes. In the evening Eumaeus got back to Ulysses
and his son, who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old and were
helping one another to get supper ready; Minerva therefore came up to
Ulysses, turned him into an old man with a stroke of her wand, and
clad him in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd might
recognise him and not keep the secret, but go and tell Penelope.

Telemachus was the first to speak. "So you have got back, Eumaeus," said
he. "What is the news of the town? Have the suitors returned, or are
they still waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?"

"I did not think of asking about that," replied Eumaeus, "when I was in
the town. I thought I would give my message and come back as soon as I
could. I met a man sent by those who had gone with you to Pylos, and he
was the first to tell the news to your mother, but I can say what I saw
with my own eyes; I had just got on to the crest of the hill of Mercury
above the town when I saw a ship coming into harbour with a number of
men in her. They had many shields and spears, and I thought it was the
suitors, but I cannot be sure."

On hearing this Telemachus smiled to his father, but so that Eumaeus
could not see him.

Then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they ate
it, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. As
soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest and
enjoyed the boon of sleep.
