Book XXIII

PENELOPE EVENTUALLY RECOGNISES HER HUSBAND--EARLY IN THE MORNING
ULYSSES, TELEMACHUS, EUMAEUS, AND PHILOETIUS LEAVE THE TOWN.

Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear
husband had come home. Her aged knees became young again and her feet
were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her
head to speak to her. "Wake up Penelope, my dear child," she exclaimed,
"and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting this
long time past. Ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and has
killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble in his house, eating
up his estate and ill treating his son."

"My good nurse," answered Penelope, "you must be mad. The gods sometimes
send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make foolish
people become sensible. This is what they must have been doing to you;
for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should you thus mock
me when I have trouble enough already--talking such nonsense, and waking
me up out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of my eyes and
closed them? I have never slept so soundly from the day my poor husband
went to that city with the ill-omened name. Go back again into the
women's room; if it had been any one else who had woke me up to bring me
such absurd news I should have sent her away with a severe scolding. As
it is your age shall protect you."

"My dear child," answered Euryclea, "I am not mocking you. It is quite
true as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was the stranger
whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachus knew
all the time that he was come back, but kept his father's secret that he
might have his revenge on all these wicked people."

Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea,
and wept for joy. "But my dear nurse," said she, "explain this to me;
if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome the
wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always
were?"

"I was not there," answered Euryclea, "and do not know; I only heard
them groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching and huddled
up in a corner of the women's room with the doors closed, till your
son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I found Ulysses
standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all round him,
one on top of the other. You would have enjoyed it if you could have
seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and filth, and
looking just like a lion. But the corpses are now all piled up in the
gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit a great fire
to purify the house with sulphur. He has sent me to call you, so come
with me that you may both be happy together after all; for now at last
the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband is come home
to find both wife and son alive and well, and to take his revenge in his
own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him."

"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "do not exult too confidently over all
this. You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses come
home--more particularly myself, and the son who has been born to both
of us; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some god who is
angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an end
of them; for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor
poor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end in consequence
of their iniquity; Ulysses is dead far away from the Achaean land; he
will never return home again."

Then nurse Euryclea said, "My child, what are you talking about? but you
were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your husband is
never coming, although he is in the house and by his own fire side
at this very moment. Besides I can give you another proof; when I was
washing him I perceived the scar which the wild boar gave him, and I
wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom he would not let me, and
clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with me and I will make this
bargain with you--if I am deceiving you, you may have me killed by the
most cruel death you can think of."

"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "however wise you may be you can hardly
fathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in search of
my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has
killed them."

On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she
considered whether she should keep at a distance from her husband and
question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace
him. When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister, she
sat down opposite Ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right angles
{180} [to that by which she had entered], while Ulysses sat near one of
the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to see what his
brave wife would say to him when she saw him. For a long time she sat
silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she looked him full
in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his shabby
clothes and failed to recognise him, {181} till Telemachus began to
reproach her and said:

"Mother--but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name--why
do you keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sit by his
side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No other woman
could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to her
after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much;
but your heart always was as hard as a stone."

Penelope answered, "My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can find
no words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. I cannot
even look him straight in the face. Still, if he really is Ulysses
come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand one another
better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two are alone
acquainted, and which are hidden from all others."

Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, "Let your mother put me
to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.
She rejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else,
because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us,
however, consider what we had better do next. When one man has killed
another--even though he was not one who would leave many friends to take
up his quarrel--the man who has killed him must still say good bye to
his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing the stay
of a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca. I would have you
consider this matter."

"Look to it yourself, father," answered Telemachus, "for they say you
are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no other
mortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with right good
will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds
out."

"I will say what I think will be best," answered Ulysses. "First wash
and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room and
dress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre, so that if
people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one going along
the street happens to notice it, they may think there is a wedding in
the house, and no rumours about the death of the suitors will get about
in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon my own land. Once
there, we will settle which of the courses heaven vouchsafes us shall
seem wisest."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washed
and put their shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius took
his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance. The
house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the people
outside said, "I suppose the queen has been getting married at last.
She ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect her
husband's property until he comes home." {182}

This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had been
happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses in his
own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made him look
taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick on
the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she
glorified him about the head and shoulders just as a skilful workman who
has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan or Minerva--and his work is
full of beauty--enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it. He came
from the bath looking like one of the immortals, and sat down opposite
his wife on the seat he had left. "My dear," said he, "heaven has
endowed you with a heart more unyielding than woman ever yet had. No
other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come
back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through
so much. But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; I will sleep alone,
for this woman has a heart as hard as iron."

"My dear," answered Penelope, "I have no wish to set myself up, nor to
depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very well
remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.
Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he
himself built. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it
with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets."

She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, "Wife,
I am much displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has been
taking my bed from the place in which I left it? He must have found it a
hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some god came
and helped him to shift it. There is no man living, however strong and
in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it is a marvellous
curiosity which I made with my very own hands. There was a young olive
growing within the precincts of the house, in full vigour, and about as
thick as a bearing-post. I built my room round this with strong walls
of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made the doors strong and
well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of the olive tree and left
the stump standing. This I dressed roughly from the root upwards and
then worked with carpenter's tools well and skilfully, straightening
my work by drawing a line on the wood, and making it into a bed-prop.
I then bored a hole down the middle, and made it the centre-post of my
bed, at which I worked till I had finished it, inlaying it with gold and
silver; after this I stretched a hide of crimson leather from one side
of it to the other. So you see I know all about it, and I desire to
learn whether it is still there, or whether any one has been removing it
by cutting down the olive tree at its roots."

When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke
down. She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and
kissed him. "Do not be angry with me Ulysses," she cried, "you, who are
the wisest of mankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven has denied
us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together; do
not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that I did not embrace you thus
as soon as I saw you. I have been shuddering all the time through fear
that someone might come here and deceive me with a lying story; for
there are many very wicked people going about. Jove's daughter Helen
would never have yielded herself to a man from a foreign country, if she
had known that the sons of Achaeans would come after her and bring her
back. Heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave no thought
to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows. Now, however,
that you have convinced me by showing that you know all about our
bed (which no human being has ever seen but you and I and a single
maidservant, the daughter of Actor, who was given me by my father on my
marriage, and who keeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though I
have been I can mistrust no longer."

Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and
faithful wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men who
are swimming towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their ship with
the fury of his winds and waves; a few alone reach the land, and these,
covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves on firm
ground and out of danger--even so was her husband welcome to her as she
looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms from about
his neck. Indeed they would have gone on indulging their sorrow till
rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined otherwise, and
held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer Dawn to
leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and Phaethon that bear
her onward to break the day upon mankind.

At last, however, Ulysses said, "Wife, we have not yet reached the end
of our troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. It
is long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus the shade
of Teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when I went down into
Hades to ask about my return and that of my companions. But now let us
go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep."

"You shall go to bed as soon as you please," replied Penelope, "now that
the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your country.
But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me about the
task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about it later, so it is
better that I should be told at once."

"My dear," answered Ulysses, "why should you press me to tell you?
Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. I do
not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide, carrying
an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never heard of
the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They know nothing
about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He gave me this
certain token which I will not hide from you. He said that a wayfarer
should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing shovel that I had
on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in the ground and sacrifice
a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I was to go home and
offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the other. As for
myself, he said that death should come to me from the sea, and that my
life should ebb away very gently when I was full of years and peace of
mind, and my people should bless me. All this, he said, should surely
come to pass."

And Penelope said, "If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier
time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from
misfortune."

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches
and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid
them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the
bed chamber woman Eurynome {183} to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed by
torch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went
back, and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and made
the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep in the
cloisters.

When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking
with one another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing
the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many
sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much trouble
he had himself given to other people. He told her everything, and she
was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till he had
ended his whole story.

He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached the
fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops
and how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave
comrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably and
furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home, for to
his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how he went on
to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyed all his
ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only. Then he told
of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to the chill house of
Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias, and how he
saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who bore him and brought
him up when he was a child; how he then heard the wondrous singing of
the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and terrible Charybdis
and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in safety; how his men
then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jove therefore struck the
ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men perished together,
himself alone being left alive; how at last he reached the Ogygian
island and the nymph Calypso, who kept him there in a cave, and fed
him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case she intended making him
immortal so that he should never grow old, but she could not persuade
him to let her do so; and how after much suffering he had found his way
to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as though he had been a god, and
sent him back in a ship to his own country after having given him gold,
bronze, and raiment in great abundance. This was the last thing about
which he told her, for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased
the burden of his sorrows.

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed that
Ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned
Dawn rise out of Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. On
this, Ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to Penelope,
"Wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here, in
lamenting my absence, and I in being prevented from getting home though
I was longing all the time to do so. Now, however, that we have at last
come together, take care of the property that is in the house. As for
the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, I will take
many myself by force from other people, and will compel the Achaeans to
make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. I am now
going to the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has
so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself I will give these
instructions, though you have little need of them. At sunrise it will
at once get abroad that I have been killing the suitors; go upstairs,
therefore, {184} and stay there with your women. See nobody and ask no
questions." {185}

As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus,
Philoetius, and Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also.
This they did, and armed themselves. When they had done so, they
opened the gates and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way. It was now
daylight, but Minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led
them quickly out of the town.