Book IX

ULYSSES DECLARES HIMSELF AND BEGINS HIS STORY---THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI,
AND CYCLOPES.


And Ulysses answered, "King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear a bard
with such a divine voice as this man has. There is nothing better or
more delightful than when a whole people make merry together, with the
guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread
and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every
man. This is indeed as fair a sight as a man can see. Now, however,
since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle my
own sad memories in respect of them, I do not know how to begin, nor yet
how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven has been
laid heavily upon me.

"Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it, and
one day, if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests though I
live so far away from all of you. I am Ulysses son of Laertes, renowned
among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my fame ascends to
heaven. I live in Ithaca, where there is a high mountain called Neritum,
covered with forests; and not far from it there is a group of islands
very near to one another--Dulichium, Same, and the wooded island of
Zacynthus. It lies squat on the horizon, all highest up in the sea
towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it towards dawn. {75}
It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my eyes know none
that they better love to look upon. The goddess Calypso kept me with her
in her cave, and wanted me to marry her, as did also the cunning Aeaean
goddess Circe; but they could neither of them persuade me, for there
is nothing dearer to a man than his own country and his parents, and
however splendid a home he may have in a foreign country, if it be far
from father or mother, he does not care about it. Now, however, I will
tell you of the many hazardous adventures which by Jove's will I met
with on my return from Troy.

"When I had set sail thence the wind took me first to Ismarus, which is
the city of the Cicons. There I sacked the town and put the people to
the sword. We took their wives and also much booty, which we divided
equitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain. I
then said that we had better make off at once, but my men very foolishly
would not obey me, so they staid there drinking much wine and killing
great numbers of sheep and oxen on the sea shore. Meanwhile the Cicons
cried out for help to other Cicons who lived inland. These were more in
number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in the art of war,
for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as the occasion
served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick as leaves and
bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, so that we were
hard pressed. They set the battle in array near the ships, and the hosts
aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another. {76} So long as the day
waxed and it was still morning, we held our own against them, though
they were more in number than we; but as the sun went down, towards the
time when men loose their oxen, the Cicons got the better of us, and we
lost half a dozen men from every ship we had; so we got away with those
that were left.

"Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have
escaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till we
had thrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by the
hands of the Cicons. Then Jove raised the North wind against us till it
blew a hurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and
night sprang forth out of the heavens. We let the ships run before the
gale, but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we took
them down for fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards the land.
There we lay two days and two nights suffering much alike from toil and
distress of mind, but on the morning of the third day we again raised
our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting the wind and steersmen
direct our ship. I should have got home at that time unharmed had not
the North wind and the currents been against me as I was doubling Cape
Malea, and set me off my course hard by the island of Cythera.

"I was driven thence by foul winds for a space of nine days upon the
sea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the Lotus-eaters, who
live on a food that comes from a kind of flower. Here we landed to take
in fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore near
the ships. When they had eaten and drunk I sent two of my company to
see what manner of men the people of the place might be, and they had
a third man under them. They started at once, and went about among the
Lotus-eaters, who did them no hurt, but gave them to eat of the lotus,
which was so delicious that those who ate of it left off caring about
home, and did not even want to go back and say what had happened to
them, but were for staying and munching lotus {77} with the Lotus-eaters
without thinking further of their return; nevertheless, though they wept
bitterly I forced them back to the ships and made them fast under the
benches. Then I told the rest to go on board at once, lest any of them
should taste of the lotus and leave off wanting to get home, so they
took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars.

"We sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land of
the lawless and inhuman Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes neither plant nor
plough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, and
grapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapes
yield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them. They have no
laws nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the tops of
high mountains; each is lord and master in his family, and they take no
account of their neighbours.

"Now off their harbour there lies a wooded and fertile island not quite
close to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far. It is over-run
with wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are never
disturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen--who as a rule will suffer so
much hardship in forest or among mountain precipices--do not go there,
nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it lies a wilderness
untilled and unsown from year to year, and has no living thing upon it
but only goats. For the Cyclopes have no ships, nor yet shipwrights who
could make ships for them; they cannot therefore go from city to city,
or sail over the sea to one another's country as people who have ships
can do; if they had had these they would have colonised the island, {78}
for it is a very good one, and would yield everything in due season.
There are meadows that in some places come right down to the sea
shore, well watered and full of luscious grass; grapes would do there
excellently; there is level land for ploughing, and it would always
yield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is deep. There is a good
harbour where no cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor need a ship be
moored, but all one has to do is to beach one's vessel and stay there
till the wind becomes fair for putting out to sea again. At the head of
the harbour there is a spring of clear water coming out of a cave, and
there are poplars growing all round it.

"Here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must have
brought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. A thick mist
hung all round our ships; {79} the moon was hidden behind a mass of
clouds so that no one could have seen the island if he had looked for
it, nor were there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before
we found ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached
the ships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beach
till daybreak.

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we admired
the island and wandered all over it, while the nymphs Jove's daughters
roused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner. On
this we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships, and
dividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats. Heaven
sent us excellent sport; I had twelve ships with me, and each ship got
nine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong day to
the going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill, and we had plenty
of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full when we sacked
the city of the Cicons, and this had not yet run out. While we were
feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of the Cyclopes,
which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires. We could
almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating of their sheep and
goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we camped down
upon the beach, and next morning I called a council.

"'Stay here, my brave fellows,' said I, 'all the rest of you, while I go
with my ship and exploit these people myself: I want to see if they are
uncivilised savages, or a hospitable and humane race.'

"I went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers; so
they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars. When we
got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of a cliff near
the sea, we saw a great cave overhung with laurels. It was a station for
a great many sheep and goats, and outside there was a large yard, with
a high wall round it made of stones built into the ground and of trees
both pine and oak. This was the abode of a huge monster who was then
away from home shepherding his flocks. He would have nothing to do with
other people, but led the life of an outlaw. He was a horrid creature,
not like a human being at all, but resembling rather some crag that
stands out boldly against the sky on the top of a high mountain.

"I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, all
but the twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself. I also
took a goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me by Maron,
son of Euanthes, who was priest of Apollo the patron god of Ismarus, and
lived within the wooded precincts of the temple. When we were sacking
the city we respected him, and spared his life, as also his wife and
child; so he made me some presents of great value--seven talents of fine
gold, and a bowl of silver, with twelve jars of sweet wine, unblended,
and of the most exquisite flavour. Not a man nor maid in the house knew
about it, but only himself, his wife, and one housekeeper: when he drank
it he mixed twenty parts of water to one of wine, and yet the fragrance
from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that it was impossible to refrain
from drinking. I filled a large skin with this wine, and took a wallet
full of provisions with me, for my mind misgave me that I might have to
deal with some savage who would be of great strength, and would respect
neither right nor law.

"We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we went inside
and took stock of all that we could see. His cheese-racks were loaded
with cheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his pens could hold.
They were kept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets, then
the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones {80} all
kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels, bowls,
and milk pails into which he milked, were swimming with whey. When they
saw all this, my men begged me to let them first steal some cheeses, and
make off with them to the ship; they would then return, drive down the
lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away with them. It would have
been indeed better if we had done so but I would not listen to them, for
I wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope that he might give me
a present. When, however, we saw him my poor men found him ill to deal
with.

"We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others
of them, and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with his
sheep. When he came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewood
to light the fire for his supper, and this he flung with such a noise on
to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for fear at the far end
of the cavern. Meanwhile he drove all the ewes inside, as well as the
she-goats that he was going to milk, leaving the males, both rams and
he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolled a huge stone to the mouth
of the cave--so huge that two and twenty strong four-wheeled waggons
would not be enough to draw it from its place against the doorway. When
he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats, all in due
course, and then let each of them have her own young. He curdled half
the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the other half he
poured into bowls that he might drink it for his supper. When he had got
through with all his work, he lit the fire, and then caught sight of us,
whereon he said:

"'Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from? Are you traders, or do
you sail the sea as rovers, with your hands against every man, and every
man's hand against you?'

"We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous
form, but I managed to say, 'We are Achaeans on our way home from Troy,
but by the will of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far
out of our course. We are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who
has won infinite renown throughout the whole world, by sacking so great
a city and killing so many people. We therefore humbly pray you to show
us some hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitors may
reasonably expect. May your excellency fear the wrath of heaven, for we
are your suppliants, and Jove takes all respectable travellers under his
protection, for he is the avenger of all suppliants and foreigners in
distress.'

"To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, 'Stranger,' said he, 'you are
a fool, or else you know nothing of this country. Talk to me, indeed,
about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes do not care
about Jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so much stronger
than they. I shall not spare either yourself or your companions out of
any regard for Jove, unless I am in the humour for doing so. And now
tell me where you made your ship fast when you came on shore. Was it
round the point, or is she lying straight off the land?'

"He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught in that
way, so I answered with a lie; 'Neptune,' said I, 'sent my ship on to
the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. We were driven
on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are with me escaped
the jaws of death.'

"The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with a
sudden clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down
upon the ground as though they had been puppies. Their brains were shed
upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood. Then he tore
them limb from limb and supped upon them. He gobbled them up like a lion
in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, without leaving
anything uneaten. As for us, we wept and lifted up our hands to heaven
on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did not know what else to do; but
when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had washed down his
meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretched himself
full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep. I was at
first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into his vitals,
but I reflected that if I did we should all certainly be lost, for we
should never be able to shift the stone which the monster had put in
front of the door. So we stayed sobbing and sighing where we were till
morning came.

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, he again lit
his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let
each have her own young one; as soon as he had got through with all his
work, he clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for his
morning's meal. Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled the stone
away from the door and drove out his sheep, but he at once put it back
again--as easily as though he were merely clapping the lid on to a
quiver full of arrows. As soon as he had done so he shouted, and cried
'Shoo, shoo,' after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain; so I was
left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering myself with
glory.

"In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: The
Cyclops had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens;
it was of green olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for
a staff as soon as it should be dry. It was so huge that we could
only compare it to the mast of a twenty-oared merchant vessel of large
burden, and able to venture out into open sea. I went up to this club
and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the men and
told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do,
and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end in the fire
to make it harder. When I had done this I hid it under dung, which was
lying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of
them should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into the
monster's eye while he was asleep. The lot fell upon the very four whom
I should have chosen, and I myself made five. In the evening the wretch
came back from shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave--this
time driving them all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; I
suppose some fancy must have taken him, or a god must have prompted him
to do so. As soon as he had put the stone back to its place against the
door, he sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly, and
then let each have her own young one; when he had got through with all
this work, he gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off
them. So I went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my
hands:

"'Look here, Cyclops,' said I, you have been eating a great deal of
man's flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what
kind of liquor we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as a
drink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon me and
further me on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping and
raving most intolerably. You ought to be ashamed of yourself; how can
you expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in this
way?'

"He then took the cup and drank. He was so delighted with the taste of
the wine that he begged me for another bowl full. 'Be so kind,' he said,
'as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once. I want to make
you a present that you will be glad to have. We have wine even in this
country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but this
drinks like Nectar and Ambrosia all in one.'

"I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him, and
three times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when I saw
that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly as
I could: 'Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give me,
therefore, the present you promised me; my name is Noman; this is what
my father and mother and my friends have always called me.'

"But the cruel wretch said, 'Then I will eat all Noman's comrades before
Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is the present
that I will make him.'

"As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.
His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon
him. Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets of
human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk. Then I
thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and encouraged
my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. When the wood, green
though it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of the fire glowing
with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven had filled their
hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of the beam into the
monster's eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight I kept turning it
round and round as though I were boring a hole in a ship's plank with an
auger, which two men with a wheel and strap can keep on turning as long
as they choose. Even thus did we bore the red hot beam into his eye,
till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked it round and
round, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scalded his eyelids
and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in the fire. As a
blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to temper it--for
it is this that gives strength to the iron--and it makes a great hiss as
he does so, even thus did the Cyclops' eye hiss round the beam of olive
wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again. We ran away in a
fright, but he plucked the beam all besmirched with gore from his eye,
and hurled it from him in a frenzy of rage and pain, shouting as he did
so to the other Cyclopes who lived on the bleak headlands near him;
so they gathered from all quarters round his cave when they heard him
crying, and asked what was the matter with him.

"'What ails you, Polyphemus,' said they, 'that you make such a noise,
breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being able
to sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no man is
trying to kill you either by fraud or by force?'

"But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, 'Noman is killing
me by fraud; no man is killing me by force.'

"'Then,' said they, 'if no man is attacking you, you must be ill; when
Jove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better pray
to your father Neptune.'

"Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my clever
stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain, felt about
with his hands till he found the stone and took it from the door; then
he sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front of it to catch
anyone going out with the sheep, for he thought I might be foolish
enough to attempt this.

"As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my own
life and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one who knows
that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. In the
end I deemed that this plan would be the best; the male sheep were well
grown, and carried a heavy black fleece, so I bound them noiselessly in
threes together, with some of the withies on which the wicked monster
used to sleep. There was to be a man under the middle sheep, and the two
on either side were to cover him, so that there were three sheep to each
man. As for myself there was a ram finer than any of the others, so I
caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in the thick wool under
his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece, face upwards, keeping a
firm hold on it all the time.

"Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, but
when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male sheep
hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens
waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their
master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they
stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men were
underneath their bellies. As the ram was going out, last of all, heavy
with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty self, Polyphemus laid
hold of it and said:

"'My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave this
morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the
mob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are the
first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all. Is it
because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry because
that wicked Noman and his horrid crew has got him down in his drink and
blinded him? But I will have his life yet. If you could understand and
talk, you would tell me where the wretch is hiding, and I would dash his
brains upon the ground till they flew all over the cave. I should thus
have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good Noman has done me.'

"As he spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way
out from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram's belly,
and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by
constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive them
down to the ship. The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who
had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the Cyclops had killed.
However, I made signs to them by nodding and frowning that they were to
hush their crying, and told them to get all the sheep on board at once
and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their places, and smote
the grey sea with their oars. Then, when I had got as far out as my
voice would reach, I began to jeer at the Cyclops.

"'Cyclops,' said I, 'you should have taken better measure of your man
before eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eat up your
visitors in your own house? You might have known that your sin would
find you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished you.'

"He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from
off a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that
it was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder. {81} The sea
quaked as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised
carried us back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore.
But I snatched up a long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my
men by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon they
laid out with a will. When we had got twice as far as we were before, I
was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged and prayed of
me to hold my tongue.

"'Do not,' they exclaimed, 'be mad enough to provoke this savage
creature further; he has thrown one rock at us already which drove us
back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death
of us; if he had then heard any further sound of voices he would have
pounded our heads and our ship's timbers into a jelly with the rugged
rocks he would have heaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.'

"But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage,
'Cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and
spoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son of
Laertes, who lives in Ithaca.'

"On this he groaned, and cried out, 'Alas, alas, then the old prophecy
about me is coming true. There was a prophet here, at one time, a man
both brave and of great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was an
excellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the Cyclopes till he
grew old; he told me that all this would happen to me some day, and said
I should lose my sight by the hand of Ulysses. I have been all along
expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength, whereas
he turns out to be a little insignificant weakling, who has managed to
blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my drink; come here, then,
Ulysses, that I may make you presents to show my hospitality, and urge
Neptune to help you forward on your journey--for Neptune and I are
father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me, which no one else
neither god nor man can do.'

"Then I said, 'I wish I could be as sure of killing you outright and
sending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take more
than Neptune to cure that eye of yours.'

"On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed,
saying, 'Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true begotten
son, grant that Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he must
get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight
after losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man's ship
and find trouble in his house.'] {82}

"Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer. Then he picked up
a rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with
prodigious force. It fell just short of the ship, but was within a
little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked as the rock fell
into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards on our way
towards the shore of the island.

"When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our
ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our
return. We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the
sea shore; we also landed the Cyclops' sheep, and divided them equitably
amongst us so that none might have reason to complain. As for the ram,
my companions agreed that I should have it as an extra share; so I
sacrificed it on the sea shore, and burned its thigh bones to Jove, who
is the lord of all. But he heeded not my sacrifice, and only thought how
he might destroy both my ships and my comrades.

"Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted
our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on
dark, we camped upon the beach. When the child of morning rosy-fingered
Dawn appeared, I bade my men on board and loose the hawsers. Then they
took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars; so we sailed
on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we
had lost our comrades.
